# Response from Gemini

\*\*

# AI in Computational Psychiatry: Advancing Personalized Mental Healthcare

1\. Introduction: The Convergence of AI and Computational Psychiatry

The escalating global burden of mental health disorders presents a significant
challenge to healthcare systems worldwide. Traditional diagnostic and
treatment approaches, often relying on subjective symptom reporting and trial-
and-error methodologies, face limitations in addressing the complex and
heterogeneous nature of these conditions. In response, computational
psychiatry has emerged as an interdisciplinary field that seeks to understand
mental illness through the lens of quantitative methods and computational
models.1 This approach aims to move beyond qualitative symptom-based
classifications toward a more objective, mechanism-based understanding of
mental disorders.1 By leveraging mathematical and computational techniques,
researchers aim to develop more precise diagnostic tools, identify novel
therapeutic targets, and predict individual treatment responses.3

Artificial Intelligence (AI) stands as a powerful tool with the capacity to
analyze complex datasets and identify patterns that may be relevant to mental
health.5 AI methodologies, including machine learning, deep learning, and
natural language processing, offer unprecedented capabilities for processing
and interpreting the vast amounts of data generated in mental healthcare and
research.7 This report argues that AI is poised to significantly advance
personalized mental healthcare within the framework of computational
psychiatry through digital phenotyping, predictive modeling, and ethically-
guided interventions. The following sections will explore the advancements in
AI methodologies for computational psychiatry, the role of digital phenotyping
in unveiling mental health insights from digital data, the application of
predictive modeling to forecast mental health trajectories, the critical
considerations for ethically-guided interventions, practical examples of AI-
powered tools and applications, the synergistic relationship between
neuroscience, AI, and computational psychiatry, the perspectives of key
stakeholders (patients and clinicians), and finally, the challenges,
limitations, and the path forward for this rapidly evolving field.

2\. Advancements in AI Methodologies for Computational Psychiatry

Computational psychiatry increasingly employs a range of sophisticated AI
methodologies to analyze complex mental health data. Machine Learning (ML)
algorithms, a core component of AI, learn from data to make predictions or
classifications without explicit programming.3 Supervised learning techniques,
such as support vector machines and random forests, are utilized for
classifying diagnostic categories based on labeled datasets.9 Conversely,
unsupervised learning methods, like clustering, are employed to identify
hidden patterns within unlabeled data, potentially revealing novel subtypes of
mental disorders or symptom clusters.7 The ability of ML algorithms to uncover
intricate relationships in high-dimensional mental health data offers a
significant advantage over traditional statistical methods, as mental health
data often involves numerous interacting factors. These algorithms can
efficiently process vast datasets, revealing subtle correlations between
symptoms, biological markers, and environmental factors, thereby fostering a
more nuanced understanding of mental disorders.

Deep Learning (DL), a class of machine learning algorithms utilizing neural
networks with multiple layers, excels at learning intricate features from raw
data such as images, text, and time series.6 In computational psychiatry, DL
finds significant application in neuroimaging analysis, including functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG) data, as
well as in Natural Language Processing (NLP).7 DL's capacity to automatically
extract hierarchical features makes it particularly well-suited for analyzing
the complex biological and behavioral data inherent in psychiatric research.
For instance, DL can automatically learn relevant features from brain imaging
data and language patterns, potentially identifying subtle biomarkers or
linguistic markers indicative of specific mental health conditions without
requiring manual feature engineering.

Natural Language Processing (NLP) encompasses techniques for analyzing and
understanding human language, enabling the extraction of valuable insights
from text and speech.6 Sentiment analysis, a key application of NLP, allows
for the tracking of mood and mental states through the analysis of textual
data.14 Furthermore, Large Language Models (LLMs) like ChatGPT are
increasingly being explored for various psychiatric applications, including
diagnostic support and therapeutic interventions.6 NLP's ability to transform
unstructured clinical notes and patient communications into valuable
structured data for diagnosis, monitoring, and predicting mental health
outcomes represents a significant advancement. Clinicians often record
extensive information in free-text notes, and NLP can analyze this text to
identify key symptoms, treatment responses, and other relevant details,
effectively converting these notes into a structured data source for AI
models.

Predictive Analytics utilizes AI to forecast future mental health states,
treatment responses, and potential risks.7 By analyzing historical data, AI
can identify patterns that precede mental health crises or predict which
treatments are most likely to be effective for a given patient, enabling
proactive and tailored care. These predictive models can enable early
intervention and personalized treatment strategies by identifying individuals
at high risk or those likely to respond to specific therapies.

3\. Digital Phenotyping: Unveiling Mental Health Through Digital Data

Digital phenotyping represents a groundbreaking approach to understanding
mental health by providing a real-time quantification of an individual's
characteristics using data collected from their digital devices.9 This method
leverages the ubiquity of smartphones and wearable technology to gather
continuous and objective data that can offer unique insights into an
individual's mental state. Various sources of digital data are relevant to
mental health assessment. Smartphones, for example, generate data from call
and messaging logs, location services, app usage patterns, social media
activity, and even speech patterns.6 This smartphone data can provide passive,
continuous insights into an individual's social behavior, activity levels, and
communication patterns, all of which can correlate with their mental health
states. Changes in communication frequency, social interactions, or mobility
patterns detected through smartphone data can serve as early indicators of
mental health fluctuations.

Wearable devices, such as activity trackers and smartwatches, collect
physiological data including heart rate variability, sleep patterns, and
movement.7 This wearable sensor data offers objective, continuous monitoring
of physiological markers associated with stress, sleep, and activity,
providing valuable indicators of mental well-being. For instance, disruptions
in sleep patterns or changes in heart rate variability captured by wearables
can signal shifts in mental health status. Social media platforms also serve
as a rich source of data, where the analysis of language and behavior can
contribute to real-time mental health surveillance and the early detection of
distress.6 While ethical considerations are paramount, social media data, when
analyzed responsibly, can offer insights into population-level mental health
trends and potentially identify individuals who may be at risk. Language used
in social media posts can reflect underlying emotional states and potentially
indicate early signs of mental health issues.

AI plays a crucial role in processing and interpreting the vast amounts of
digital phenotyping data to identify meaningful patterns known as digital
biomarkers and phenotypes.18 AI algorithms can extract meaningful patterns and
correlations from diverse digital data streams, creating comprehensive and
dynamic profiles of individuals' mental health. Combining data from multiple
digital sources and using AI to analyze it can provide a more holistic and
accurate picture of an individual's mental health than relying on single data
points or traditional assessments alone. The potential of digital phenotyping
for early detection, personalized monitoring, and treatment efficacy
assessment is substantial.19 Continuous, remote monitoring through digital
phenotyping can improve diagnostic precision, facilitate timely interventions,
and enable data-driven adjustments to treatment plans. By tracking changes in
digital biomarkers over time, clinicians can gain a better understanding of
treatment effectiveness and make more informed decisions about modifying
interventions.

4\. Predictive Modeling: Forecasting Mental Health Trajectories

AI is increasingly being used to construct sophisticated predictive models in
the field of psychiatry, aiming to forecast various aspects of mental health
trajectories. One key application is in predicting the risk of developing
mental health disorders. AI algorithms analyze diverse data sources, including
electronic health records (EHRs), genetic information, and digital phenotyping
data, to identify individuals at high risk of conditions such as depression,
anxiety, schizophrenia, and bipolar disorder.7 This capability for early risk
prediction can enable proactive interventions and preventive strategies,
potentially mitigating the onset or severity of mental illness. Identifying
risk factors early allows for targeted interventions before symptoms become
severe, potentially improving long-term outcomes.

Another significant area of predictive modeling involves forecasting treatment
response. AI is applied to predict which patients are most likely to benefit
from specific medications or therapies, such as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
(CBT).7 Personalized treatment recommendations based on AI predictions can
reduce the often lengthy and frustrating process of trial-and-error
prescribing, leading to enhanced therapeutic outcomes. By analyzing patient
data and treatment histories, AI can predict the likelihood of success for
different interventions, allowing clinicians to make more informed decisions
and tailor treatments to individual needs. Furthermore, AI is being utilized
to predict relapse in individuals with conditions like addiction and mood
disorders.13 By identifying patterns and indicators that precede relapses, AI
models can facilitate timely support and tailored interventions to prevent the
recurrence of mental health crises. Identifying early warning signs of relapse
through AI analysis allows for proactive intervention and support, potentially
preventing full-blown episodes.

The data sources underpinning these predictive models are varied and
comprehensive, encompassing electronic health records, neuroimaging data,
genetic information, and the increasingly rich data streams from digital
phenotyping.7 The potential benefits of predictive modeling in psychiatry are
substantial, promising to improve patient outcomes, optimize the allocation of
often scarce healthcare resources, and advance the field of precision
psychiatry.37 AI-driven predictive analytics can contribute to a more
proactive, personalized, and efficient approach to mental healthcare. By
predicting risks, treatment responses, and relapses, AI can help optimize care
pathways, allocate resources effectively, and ultimately improve patient well-
being.

5\. Ethically-Guided Interventions: Navigating the Moral Landscape of AI in
Mental Healthcare

The integration of AI into mental healthcare necessitates careful
consideration of several critical ethical dimensions. Given the sensitive
nature of mental health information, privacy and data security are paramount
concerns. Robust privacy safeguards and stringent data protection measures,
such as compliance with regulations like HIPAA and GDPR, are essential to
maintain patient trust and uphold ethical standards in AI-driven mental
healthcare.39 Ensuring the confidentiality and security of patient data is
fundamental to fostering trust in AI tools.

Algorithmic bias and fairness represent another significant ethical challenge.
AI models learn from data, and if this data reflects existing societal
inequities, the models may perpetuate or even amplify these biases, leading to
inequitable outcomes for certain demographic groups based on factors like
gender, race, and socioeconomic status.39 To mitigate this risk, AI models
must be trained on diverse and representative datasets and rigorously
evaluated for bias to ensure fair and equitable application across all
populations.

Transparency and explainability are crucial for building trust in AI-driven
mental healthcare. Understanding how AI models arrive at their
recommendations, often referred to as Explainable AI (XAI), is vital for both
clinicians and patients.6 This transparency ensures accountability and enables
clinicians to exercise informed judgment when using AI tools. Clinicians need
to understand the reasoning behind AI recommendations to validate them and
ensure they align with their clinical expertise. Explainability also fosters
patient trust in the technology.

Autonomy and informed consent are fundamental ethical principles that must be
upheld when using AI in mental healthcare.40 Patients must be provided with
clear and comprehensive information about the AI tools being used in their
care, including their benefits and limitations, and they must have the
autonomy to make informed decisions about their involvement. Ethical practice
requires that patients understand how AI will be used in their care and have
the right to opt out.

Finally, human oversight and accountability are essential components of
ethically-guided AI interventions.40 AI should serve as a tool to augment, not
replace, the expertise and empathy of human clinicians. Clear lines of
responsibility must be established for AI-related outcomes to address
potential errors or unintended consequences. While AI can provide valuable
support, human clinicians remain indispensable for providing empathetic care
and making critical decisions, especially in complex or high-risk situations.
Mechanisms for accountability must be in place to address any issues that may
arise from the use of AI.

Principles of responsible AI in healthcare, including safety, fairness,
transparency, and accountability, provide a framework for navigating these
ethical considerations.40 Furthermore, the regulatory landscape for AI in
mental health tools is evolving, with initiatives at both federal (e.g., FDA
guidelines) and state levels aiming to ensure safe and effective
implementation.6 The regulatory environment is still developing and needs to
keep pace with the rapid advancements in AI to ensure safe and effective
implementation. As AI in mental health evolves, clear regulatory frameworks
are necessary to guide its development, validation, and deployment, ensuring
patient safety and efficacy.

6\. AI-Powered Tools and Applications in Practice

The field of mental healthcare is witnessing a growing number of AI-powered
tools and applications that are transforming various aspects of diagnosis,
treatment, and support. AI chatbots and virtual therapists are playing an
increasingly significant role in providing accessible, round-the-clock mental
health support.5 These AI-driven conversational agents can deliver
interventions based on Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) techniques, offer
psychoeducation, and provide immediate support to individuals facing mental
health challenges. The accessibility of AI chatbots can significantly increase
the reach of mental health support, particularly for individuals in
underserved areas or those who may face barriers such as cost or stigma
associated with traditional therapy. Clinical trials have demonstrated the
efficacy of AI chatbots in reducing symptoms of depression and anxiety,
highlighting their potential as valuable tools in mental healthcare.26
Research is also exploring the concept of a "digital therapeutic alliance,"
investigating the extent to which users can form a trusting and collaborative
relationship with AI-powered therapeutic tools.63

AI is also proving to be a valuable asset in diagnosis and clinical decision
support. Its ability to analyze diverse datasets, including neuroimaging data,
speech patterns, and textual information from clinical notes, can assist
clinicians in the early detection, diagnosis, and differential diagnosis of
various mental disorders.3 AI can augment clinical intuition by identifying
subtle patterns and biomarkers that may improve diagnostic accuracy and
timeliness. By processing large amounts of data, AI can help clinicians
identify diagnostic patterns that might not be readily apparent through
traditional clinical assessments.

AI-enhanced Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy (VRET) represents another
promising application. AI can be used to personalize and optimize VRET for the
treatment of phobias, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), and anxiety
disorders.5 By tailoring virtual environments and adjusting the intensity of
exposure based on individual patient needs and progress, AI can enhance the
effectiveness of VRET. This personalization and adaptability can lead to
better therapeutic outcomes by adjusting the virtual experience in real-time
based on the patient's reactions.

Furthermore, AI plays a crucial role in remote patient monitoring and
enhancing adherence to treatment plans.5 When used in conjunction with
wearable devices and other digital tools, AI can continuously monitor patient
progress, detect early signs of deterioration, and provide personalized
reminders and support to improve medication and therapy adherence. AI-powered
remote monitoring can provide continuous insights into patient well-being and
facilitate timely interventions, potentially preventing crises. By
continuously monitoring physiological and behavioral data, AI can detect
subtle changes that might indicate a decline in mental health, allowing for
proactive support and intervention.

Beyond direct patient care, AI also offers significant potential for
streamlining administrative tasks within mental healthcare settings.5
Automating tasks such as clinical note-taking, appointment scheduling, and
billing can reduce the administrative burden on clinicians, freeing up
valuable time that can be redirected towards direct patient care and reducing
the risk of burnout.

7\. The Interplay of Neuroscience, AI, and Computational Psychiatry

The advancement of computational psychiatry is deeply intertwined with
insights from neuroscience and the capabilities of artificial intelligence.
Neuroscience provides the foundational understanding of brain structure,
function, and the neural correlates of mental disorders, which in turn informs
the development of AI models within computational psychiatry.1 Neuroimaging
data, such as fMRI and EEG, plays a critical role in identifying neural
markers associated with various mental disorders. This data is then used to
train AI models for tasks like diagnosis and prediction.6 A central goal of
computational psychiatry is to bridge the gap between findings from animal
models of mental illness and the complex human experience of these conditions,
and computational approaches, particularly those leveraging AI, are essential
for achieving this.35 Integrating neuroscientific understanding with AI
techniques can lead to the development of more biologically plausible and
ultimately more effective computational models of mental illness. By grounding
AI models in our knowledge of brain structure and function, we can develop
more accurate and interpretable tools for understanding and treating mental
disorders.

Conversely, AI and computational modeling contribute significantly to a deeper
understanding of the neurobiological mechanisms that underlie psychiatric
disorders.1 AI's ability to analyze large and complex neurobiological datasets
can help uncover subtle patterns and relationships that could provide novel
insights into the pathophysiology of mental illness. For example,
biophysically realistic neural network models are being used to simulate brain
functions and understand cognitive patterns in mental disorders.38 AI can help
uncover complex patterns in neurobiological data, potentially revealing novel
insights into the pathophysiology of mental illness.

Numerous ongoing research projects are actively integrating neuroscience, AI,
and computational psychiatry to further advance the field. These projects are
exploring various applications, from developing AI-powered tools for
preventing, diagnosing, and treating mental health disorders to creating
"digital twins" of the brain for personalized care.35

8\. Perspectives of Key Stakeholders: Patients and Clinicians

The successful integration of AI into mental healthcare hinges on
understanding the perspectives of both patients and clinicians. Patient
perspectives reveal a nuanced view of AI in mental healthcare. While many
patients recognize the potential benefits, such as increased access,
convenience, and potentially reduced stigma associated with seeking
traditional care 30, concerns exist regarding the accuracy of AI diagnoses,
the confidentiality of their sensitive information, and the potential loss of
the crucial human connection with their healthcare providers.91 Patients
express varying levels of comfort with AI performing different mental health
tasks, often feeling more at ease with AI providing general wellness advice or
suggesting non-pharmacological interventions compared to tasks like delivering
diagnoses or recommending medications.91 Furthermore, patients hold specific
views on responsibility and trust in the context of AI-driven mental
healthcare, often believing that healthcare professionals should ultimately be
accountable for AI-related errors.91 Understanding these patient attitudes and
concerns is crucial for the successful and ethical adoption of AI in mental
healthcare. Patient acceptance is vital for the widespread use of AI tools,
and addressing their concerns about privacy, accuracy, and the role of human
connection is essential for building trust.

Clinician perspectives also play a vital role in shaping the future of AI in
mental healthcare. Many clinicians acknowledge the potential benefits of AI,
including a reduction in administrative burden, improved efficiency in
workflows, and enhanced decision support capabilities.5 However, clinicians
also express concerns regarding the potential for misuse of AI tools, the
possible negative impact on the therapeutic relationship with patients, and
the complexities surrounding legal liability in cases involving AI-driven
recommendations.95 There is a recognized need for comprehensive training and
clear guidelines for the implementation of AI in clinical practice to ensure
its safe and effective use.41 Engaging clinicians in the development and
implementation of AI tools and proactively addressing their concerns is
essential for the seamless integration of these technologies into existing
clinical workflows. Clinician buy-in is crucial for the effective use of AI in
practice, and providing adequate training and addressing their concerns about
patient safety and their professional roles will facilitate adoption.

9\. Challenges, Limitations, and the Path Forward

Despite the significant promise of AI in computational psychiatry, several
challenges and limitations must be addressed to ensure its responsible and
effective implementation. Data heterogeneity and quality represent a primary
concern. Mental health data often comes from diverse sources and can exhibit
significant variability and potential biases, which can impact the accuracy
and reliability of AI models.3 Standardized data collection and sharing
practices are needed to overcome these limitations. The interpretability of
complex AI models, particularly deep learning networks, remains a challenge,
often referred to as the "black box" problem.3 The lack of transparency in how
these models arrive at their decisions can hinder trust and limit their
clinical utility. If clinicians cannot understand why an AI model makes a
certain recommendation, they may be hesitant to rely on it.

The ethical and societal implications of AI in mental healthcare, including
issues related to privacy, bias, autonomy, and accountability, require ongoing
and careful consideration.11 Translating research findings and AI models into
real-world clinical settings presents another significant hurdle.3 Bridging
the gap between AI research and clinical application requires addressing
practical, technical, and organizational challenges. Furthermore, the need for
robust validation and generalizability of AI models across diverse populations
and settings is critical.21 AI models developed on specific datasets may not
perform well on different patient groups, necessitating thorough validation on
diverse populations to ensure they are accurate and reliable for everyone.

Moving forward, several key priorities can help advance the field of AI in
computational psychiatry. Prioritizing the development of explainable and
trustworthy AI models is essential to foster clinician and patient
confidence.6 A strong focus on ethical and responsible AI implementation,
guided by robust regulatory frameworks, is crucial to ensure patient safety
and equitable access to care.6 Promoting interdisciplinary collaboration
between AI researchers, neuroscientists, psychiatrists, and patients will be
vital for driving innovation and addressing the complex challenges in the
field.2 Continued investment in research aimed at addressing data biases and
improving data quality and sharing practices is necessary to build more robust
and reliable AI models.41 Finally, developing standardized evaluation metrics
and validation protocols specifically for AI models in psychiatry will be
crucial for assessing their clinical utility and ensuring their responsible
deployment.21

10\. Conclusion: Realizing the Transformative Potential of AI in Personalized
Mental Healthcare

The convergence of AI and computational psychiatry holds immense potential to
revolutionize the landscape of mental healthcare, paving the way for more
personalized and effective interventions. Advancements in digital phenotyping
offer unprecedented opportunities to gather rich, continuous data on
individuals' mental states, while predictive modeling allows for the
forecasting of risks, treatment responses, and potential relapses. Ethically-
guided interventions, underpinned by principles of responsible AI, are crucial
for ensuring that these technological advancements are deployed in a manner
that prioritizes patient well-being, privacy, and autonomy.

While significant progress has been made, it is imperative to acknowledge and
address the existing challenges and ethical considerations associated with AI
in computational psychiatry. Issues such as data heterogeneity, the
interpretability of AI models, and the potential for algorithmic bias must be
tackled through ongoing research, robust regulatory frameworks, and a
commitment to interdisciplinary collaboration.

Looking ahead, the future of AI in computational psychiatry is bright. By
continuing to prioritize the development of explainable and trustworthy AI,
focusing on ethical implementation, and fostering collaboration across
disciplines, we can unlock the transformative potential of this technology to
improve the lives of countless individuals affected by mental illness,
ushering in an era of truly personalized mental healthcare.

#### Works cited

1. Computational Psychiatry: towards a mathematically informed understanding of mental illness, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://jnnp.bmj.com/content/87/1/53](https://jnnp.bmj.com/content/87/1/53)

1. Current status, challenges and future prospects in computational psychiatry: a narrative review - Consortium PSYCHIATRICUM, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/view/11244/en_US](https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/view/11244/en_US)

1. Artificial intelligence ecosystem for computational psychiatry: Ideas to practice, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.wjgnet.com/2308-3840/full/v11/i4/79.htm](https://www.wjgnet.com/2308-3840/full/v11/i4/79.htm)

1. Current status, challenges and future prospects in computational psychiatry: a narrative review - PubMed Central, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10795945/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10795945/)

1. The rise of artificial intelligence for cognitive behavioral therapy: A bibliometric overview, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12021536/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12021536/)

1. Artificial Intelligence in Psychiatry: A Review of Biological and Behavioral Data Analyses, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11854694/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11854694/)

1. Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Precision Mental Health Diagnostics and Predictive Treatment Models - ijrpr, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://ijrpr.com/uploads/V6ISSUE3/IJRPR39515.pdf](https://ijrpr.com/uploads/V6ISSUE3/IJRPR39515.pdf)

1. Artificial intelligence and Psychiatry: An overview - PMC - PubMed Central, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9760544/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9760544/)

1. (PDF) Current Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Psychiatry - ResearchGate, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391194984_Current_Applications_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_Psychiatry/download](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/391194984_Current_Applications_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_Psychiatry/download)

1. Application of Artificial Intelligence on Psychological Interventions and Diagnosis: An Overview - Frontiers, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychiatry/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2022.811665/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychiatry/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2022.811665/full)

1. Artificial Intelligence in Psychiatry: A Review of Biological and Behavioral Data Analyses, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/15/4/434](https://www.mdpi.com/2075-4418/15/4/434)

1. Decoding Schizophrenia: How AI-Enhanced fMRI Unlocks New Pathways for Precision Psychiatry - PMC - PubMed Central, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11674252/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11674252/)

1. The Transformative Role of Artificial Intelligence in Psychiatry: Enhancing Diagnosis and Treatment - Scientific Archives, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.scientificarchives.com/article/the-transformative-role-of-artificial-intelligence-in-psychiatry-enhancing-diagnosis-and-treatment](https://www.scientificarchives.com/article/the-transformative-role-of-artificial-intelligence-in-psychiatry-enhancing-diagnosis-and-treatment)

1. AI in Mental Health: Predictive Analytics and Intervention Strategies - ResearchGate, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/378395585_AI_in_Mental_Health_Predictive_Analytics_and_Intervention_Strategies](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/378395585_AI_in_Mental_Health_Predictive_Analytics_and_Intervention_Strategies)

1. AI-POWERED INNOVATIONS FOR MANAGING COMPLEX MENTAL HEALTH CONDITIONS AND ADDICTION TREATMENTS - IRJMETS, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.irjmets.com/uploadedfiles/paper//issue_1_january_2025/65895/final/fin_irjmets1735907253.pdf](https://www.irjmets.com/uploadedfiles/paper//issue_1_january_2025/65895/final/fin_irjmets1735907253.pdf)

1. Applications of large language models in psychiatry: a systematic review - Frontiers, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychiatry/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1422807/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychiatry/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2024.1422807/full)

1. AI in Psychiatry: Things Are Moving Fast - Psychiatric Times, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.psychiatrictimes.com/view/ai-in-psychiatry-things-are-moving-fast](https://www.psychiatrictimes.com/view/ai-in-psychiatry-things-are-moving-fast)

1. The State of Digital Biomarkers in Mental Health - Karger Publishers, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://karger.com/dib/article/8/1/210/916392/The-State-of-Digital-Biomarkers-in-Mental-Health](https://karger.com/dib/article/8/1/210/916392/The-State-of-Digital-Biomarkers-in-Mental-Health)

1. Digital phenotyping: how it could change mental health care and why we should all keep up, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09638237.2024.2395537](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/09638237.2024.2395537)

1. Digital phenotyping from wearables using AI characterizes psychiatric disorders and identifies genetic associations | medRxiv, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.23.24314219v2.full-text](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.23.24314219v2.full-text)

1. Artificial intelligence in mental healthcare: an overview and future perspectives - PMC, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10546438/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10546438/)

1. Wearable Artificial Intelligence for Anxiety and Depression: Scoping Review - PMC, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9896355/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9896355/)

1. Using AI and Social Media to Track Depression in Communities - SBU News, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://news.stonybrook.edu/newsroom/press-release/medical/using-ai-and-social-media-to-track-depression-in-communities/](https://news.stonybrook.edu/newsroom/press-release/medical/using-ai-and-social-media-to-track-depression-in-communities/)

1. AI in Mental Health: Use Cases and App Ideas to Watch - Onix-Systems, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://onix-systems.com/blog/ai-in-mental-health](https://onix-systems.com/blog/ai-in-mental-health)

1. Artificial intelligence predicts adolescent mental health risk before symptoms emerge. The United States is facing a youth mental health crisis. Almost 50% of teens will experience some form of mental illness, and of those, two-thirds will not get support from a mental health professional : r/science - Reddit, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/1j9k2ai/artificial_intelligence_predicts_adolescent/](https://www.reddit.com/r/science/comments/1j9k2ai/artificial_intelligence_predicts_adolescent/)

1. 3 Ways AI Could Aid Behavioral Health Screenings | AHA - American Hospital Association, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.aha.org/2025-04-15-3-ways-ai-could-aid-behavioral-health-screenings](https://www.aha.org/2025-04-15-3-ways-ai-could-aid-behavioral-health-screenings)

1. AI for precision mental health | The Alan Turing Institute, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.turing.ac.uk/research/research-projects/ai-precision-mental-health](https://www.turing.ac.uk/research/research-projects/ai-precision-mental-health)

1. AI Predicts Schizophrenia Using Patient Records - Psychiatrist.com, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.psychiatrist.com/news/ai-predicts-schizophrenia-using-patient-records/](https://www.psychiatrist.com/news/ai-predicts-schizophrenia-using-patient-records/)

1. Artificial intelligence in mental health care: a systematic review of diagnosis, monitoring, and intervention applications | Psychological Medicine - Cambridge University Press, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/psychological-medicine/article/artificial-intelligence-in-mental-health-care-a-systematic-review-of-diagnosis-monitoring-and-intervention-applications/04DBD2D05976C9B1873B475018695418](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/psychological-medicine/article/artificial-intelligence-in-mental-health-care-a-systematic-review-of-diagnosis-monitoring-and-intervention-applications/04DBD2D05976C9B1873B475018695418)

1. The Role of AI in Mental Health, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.kanahealth.ai/post/the-role-of-ai-in-mental-health](https://www.kanahealth.ai/post/the-role-of-ai-in-mental-health)

1. Computational Psychiatry – AI4Society, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://ai4society.ca/computational-psychiatry/](https://ai4society.ca/computational-psychiatry/)

1. Apps and AI could help personalize depression diagnosis and treatment - UIC today, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://today.uic.edu/apps-and-ai-could-help-personalize-depression-diagnosis-and-treatment/](https://today.uic.edu/apps-and-ai-could-help-personalize-depression-diagnosis-and-treatment/)

1. AI may help clinicians personalize treatment for generalized anxiety disorder - Penn State, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.psu.edu/news/research/story/ai-may-help-clinicians-personalize-treatment-generalized-anxiety-disorder](https://www.psu.edu/news/research/story/ai-may-help-clinicians-personalize-treatment-generalized-anxiety-disorder)

1. Could AI Help Predict and Prevent Relapse in the Future? - Redemption Recovery, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://redemptionrecoverygroup.com/could-ai-help-predict-and-prevent-relapse-in-the-future/](https://redemptionrecoverygroup.com/could-ai-help-predict-and-prevent-relapse-in-the-future/)

1. Psychiatry Computational Research - NYU Langone Health, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://med.nyu.edu/departments-institutes/psychiatry/research/computational](https://med.nyu.edu/departments-institutes/psychiatry/research/computational)

1. Artificial Intelligence for Mental Healthcare: Clinical Applications, Barriers, Facilitators, and Artificial Wisdom - PMC, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8349367/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8349367/)

1. From Serendipity to Precision: Integrating AI, Multi-Omics, and Human-Specific Models for Personalized Neuropsychiatric Care - MDPI, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9059/13/1/167](https://www.mdpi.com/2227-9059/13/1/167)

1. COMPUTATIONAL PSYCHIATRY: A BRIDGE BETWEEN TRANSLATION AND PRECISION | International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology | Oxford Academic, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://academic.oup.com/ijnp/article/28/Supplement_1/i276/8009422](https://academic.oup.com/ijnp/article/28/Supplement_1/i276/8009422)

1. Enhancing Mental Health with Artificial Intelligence: Current Trends and Future Prospects, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/379901564_Enhancing_Mental_Health_with_Artificial_Intelligence_Current_Trends_and_Future_Prospects](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/379901564_Enhancing_Mental_Health_with_Artificial_Intelligence_Current_Trends_and_Future_Prospects)

1. Regulating AI in Mental Health: Ethics of Care Perspective - PMC, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11450345/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11450345/)

1. Ethical Implementation of AI in Mental Healthcare: A Practical Guide - HIT Consultant, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://hitconsultant.net/2025/05/12/ethical-implementation-of-ai-in-mental-healthcare-a-practical-guide/](https://hitconsultant.net/2025/05/12/ethical-implementation-of-ai-in-mental-healthcare-a-practical-guide/)

1. Sports on TV for Sunday, May 18 - AP News, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://apnews.com/18db925455f959b038aafac6ad9b6741](https://apnews.com/18db925455f959b038aafac6ad9b6741)

1. Data Privacy and Security in AI - ClinicTracker, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://clinictracker.com/blog/data-privacy-and-security-in-ai-therapy](https://clinictracker.com/blog/data-privacy-and-security-in-ai-therapy)

1. The Basics of Data Privacy & Security in Healthcare AI | Eleos Blog, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://eleos.health/blog-posts/data-privacy-security-ai/](https://eleos.health/blog-posts/data-privacy-security-ai/)

1. Regulating AI in Mental Health: Ethics of Care Perspective, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://mental.jmir.org/2024/1/e58493](https://mental.jmir.org/2024/1/e58493)

1. Artificial Intelligence and the Mental Health Space: Current Failures and Future Directions, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://dlab.berkeley.edu/news/artificial-intelligence-and-mental-health-space-current-failures-and-future-directions](https://dlab.berkeley.edu/news/artificial-intelligence-and-mental-health-space-current-failures-and-future-directions)

1. AI algorithmic bias in healthcare decision making - Paubox, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.paubox.com/blog/ai-algorithmic-bias-in-healthcare-decision-making](https://www.paubox.com/blog/ai-algorithmic-bias-in-healthcare-decision-making)

1. Can AI End Biases In Mental Health Therapy? - Forbes, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.forbes.com/councils/forbestechcouncil/2024/08/21/can-ai-end-biases-in-mental-health-therapy/](https://www.forbes.com/councils/forbestechcouncil/2024/08/21/can-ai-end-biases-in-mental-health-therapy/)

1. AI for mental health screening may carry biases based on gender, race | CU Boulder Today, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.colorado.edu/today/2024/08/05/ai-mental-health-screening-may-carry-biases-based-gender-race](https://www.colorado.edu/today/2024/08/05/ai-mental-health-screening-may-carry-biases-based-gender-race)

1. Using AI to Treat Teenagers With Schizophrenia | Computer Science, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://cs.ucdavis.edu/news/using-ai-treat-teenagers-schizophrenia](https://cs.ucdavis.edu/news/using-ai-treat-teenagers-schizophrenia)

1. AI in Therapy: Practical, Ethical, and Clinical Insights for Mental‑Health Professionals, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.blueprint.ai/blog/ai-in-therapy-practical-ethical-and-clinical-insights-for-mental-health-professionals](https://www.blueprint.ai/blog/ai-in-therapy-practical-ethical-and-clinical-insights-for-mental-health-professionals)

1. Manatt Health: Health AI Policy Tracker, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.manatt.com/insights/newsletters/health-highlights/manatt-health-health-ai-policy-tracker](https://www.manatt.com/insights/newsletters/health-highlights/manatt-health-health-ai-policy-tracker)

1. Artificial intelligence in mental health care - American Psychological Association, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.apa.org/practice/artificial-intelligence-mental-health-care](https://www.apa.org/practice/artificial-intelligence-mental-health-care)

1. First Therapy Chatbot Trial Yields Mental Health Benefits - Dartmouth, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://home.dartmouth.edu/news/2025/03/first-therapy-chatbot-trial-yields-mental-health-benefits](https://home.dartmouth.edu/news/2025/03/first-therapy-chatbot-trial-yields-mental-health-benefits)

1. The (artificial intelligence) therapist can see you now - NPR, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.npr.org/sections/shots-health-news/2025/04/07/nx-s1-5351312/artificial-intelligence-mental-health-therapy](https://www.npr.org/sections/shots-health-news/2025/04/07/nx-s1-5351312/artificial-intelligence-mental-health-therapy)

1. Are Therapy Chatbots Effective for Depression and Anxiety? A Critical Comparative Review, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://apsa.org/are-therapy-chatbots-effective-for-depression-and-anxiety/](https://apsa.org/are-therapy-chatbots-effective-for-depression-and-anxiety/)

1. Exploring the Ethical Challenges of Conversational AI in Mental Health Care: Scoping Review, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e60432](https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e60432)

1. Implementing AI-driven Mental Health Interventions in the Workplace - HRTech Series, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://techrseries.com/featured/implementing-ai-driven-mental-health-interventions-in-the-workplace/](https://techrseries.com/featured/implementing-ai-driven-mental-health-interventions-in-the-workplace/)

1. The Future of Artificial Intelligence in Mental Health Nursing Practice: An Integrative Review, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11755225/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11755225/)

1. Smart Therapy Solutions: The Rise of AI in Mental Health Care - TRENDS Research & Advisory, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://trendsresearch.org/insight/smart-therapy-solutions-the-rise-of-ai-in-mental-health-care/](https://trendsresearch.org/insight/smart-therapy-solutions-the-rise-of-ai-in-mental-health-care/)

1. Psychology & AI: 9 Examples & Apps, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://positivepsychology.com/artificial-intelligence-in-psychology/](https://positivepsychology.com/artificial-intelligence-in-psychology/)

1. Leveraging Artificial Intelligence to Bridge the Mental Health Workforce Gap and Transform Care | Milbank Memorial Fund, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.milbank.org/quarterly/opinions/leveraging-artificial-intelligence-to-bridge-the-mental-health-workforce-gap-and-transform-care/](https://www.milbank.org/quarterly/opinions/leveraging-artificial-intelligence-to-bridge-the-mental-health-workforce-gap-and-transform-care/)

1. Human-guided AI therapy bot can improve mental health care, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://dhinsights.org/blog/human-guided-ai-therabot-improves-care](https://dhinsights.org/blog/human-guided-ai-therabot-improves-care)

1. Does the Digital Therapeutic Alliance Exist? Integrative Review - JMIR Mental Health, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e69294](https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e69294)

1. Does the Digital Therapeutic Alliance Exist? Integrative Review - JMIR Mental Health, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e69294/PDF](https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e69294/PDF)

1. The role of Artificial Intelligence in Mental Healthcare | RMHP - Dove Medical Press, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.dovepress.com/exploring-the-role-of-artificial-intelligence-in-mental-healthcare-cur-peer-reviewed-fulltext-article-RMHP](https://www.dovepress.com/exploring-the-role-of-artificial-intelligence-in-mental-healthcare-cur-peer-reviewed-fulltext-article-RMHP)

1. (PDF) Exploring the Role of Artificial Intelligence in Mental Healthcare: Current Trends and Future Directions – A Narrative Review for a Comprehensive Insight - ResearchGate, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380743558_Exploring_the_Role_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_Mental_Healthcare_Current_Trends_and_Future_Directions\_-\_A_Narrative_Review_for_a_Comprehensive_Insight](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/380743558_Exploring_the_Role_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_Mental_Healthcare_Current_Trends_and_Future_Directions_-_A_Narrative_Review_for_a_Comprehensive_Insight)

1. Artificial Intelligence Applications in Psychiatry - Neurotorium, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://neurotorium.org/artificial-intelligence-applications-in-psychiatry/](https://neurotorium.org/artificial-intelligence-applications-in-psychiatry/)

1. Artificial intelligence applications in mental health: the state of the art, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.italianjournalofpsychiatry.it/article/view/544](https://www.italianjournalofpsychiatry.it/article/view/544)

1. Exploring the Role of Artificial Intelligence in Mental Healthcare: Current Trends and Future Directions – A Narrative Review for a Comprehensive Insight, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11127648/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11127648/)

1. Role Of artificial intelligence and its impact in mental health services - HIMSS, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://legacy.himss.org/resources/role-artificial-intelligence-and-its-impact-mental-health-services](https://legacy.himss.org/resources/role-artificial-intelligence-and-its-impact-mental-health-services)

1. VR Exposure Therapy for Phobias: What Mental Health Providers Need to Know, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.xr.health/us/blog/exposure-therapy-for-phobias/](https://www.xr.health/us/blog/exposure-therapy-for-phobias/)

1. How virtual reality is reshaping mental health, from treating phobias to stress relief, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.mastercard.com/news/perspectives/2025/virtual-reality-in-health-care/](https://www.mastercard.com/news/perspectives/2025/virtual-reality-in-health-care/)

1. Exploring VR Therapy: A Scoping Review on Virtual Reality Exposure for Anxiety Disorders, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://psytechvr.com/vr-therapy-for-anxiety-disorders](https://psytechvr.com/vr-therapy-for-anxiety-disorders)

1. Mental Health And AI: The Future Of Psychological Well-being, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://missionconnectionhealthcare.com/blog/mental-health-and-ai-the-future-of-psychological-well-being/](https://missionconnectionhealthcare.com/blog/mental-health-and-ai-the-future-of-psychological-well-being/)

1. AI in Remote Patient Monitoring: The Top 4 Use Cases in 2025 - HealthSnap, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://welcome.healthsnap.io/blog/ai-in-remote-patient-monitoring-the-top-4-use-cases-in-2025](https://welcome.healthsnap.io/blog/ai-in-remote-patient-monitoring-the-top-4-use-cases-in-2025)

1. Revving Up Compliance Review: How Merakey and GRAND Mental Health Audit 20x More Notes with AI, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://eleos.health/blog-posts/launch-note-compliance-ai-behavioral-health/](https://eleos.health/blog-posts/launch-note-compliance-ai-behavioral-health/)

1. Artificial intelligence is impacting the field - American Psychological Association, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.apa.org/monitor/2025/01/trends-harnessing-power-of-artificial-intelligence](https://www.apa.org/monitor/2025/01/trends-harnessing-power-of-artificial-intelligence)

1. The Future Of AI In Mental Healthcare—And How Providers Can Shape It - Forbes, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.forbes.com/councils/forbesbusinesscouncil/2025/02/21/the-future-of-ai-in-mental-healthcare-and-how-providers-can-shape-it/](https://www.forbes.com/councils/forbesbusinesscouncil/2025/02/21/the-future-of-ai-in-mental-healthcare-and-how-providers-can-shape-it/)

1. The Clinician's Perspective: The hidden burden in mental health care – and how AI can help, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.tandemhealth.ai/news-articles/the-hidden-burden-in-mental-health-care---and-how-ai-can-help](https://www.tandemhealth.ai/news-articles/the-hidden-burden-in-mental-health-care---and-how-ai-can-help)

1. Neuroscience + Artificial Intelligence = NeuroAI - Columbia | Zuckerman Institute, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://zuckermaninstitute.columbia.edu/neuroscience-artificial-intelligence-neuroai](https://zuckermaninstitute.columbia.edu/neuroscience-artificial-intelligence-neuroai)

1. Computational Psychiatry and Computational Neurology: Seeking for Mechanistic Modeling in Cognitive Impairment and Dementia - Frontiers, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/computational-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fncom.2022.865805/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/computational-neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fncom.2022.865805/full)

1. Using AI and Neuroscience to Transform Mental Health - NYAS, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.nyas.org/ideas-insights/blog/using-ai-and-neuroscience-to-improve-mental-health/](https://www.nyas.org/ideas-insights/blog/using-ai-and-neuroscience-to-improve-mental-health/)

1. Center for Computational Psychiatry - Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://icahn.mssm.edu/research/center-for-computational-psychiatry](https://icahn.mssm.edu/research/center-for-computational-psychiatry)

1. Current status, challenges and future prospects in computational psychiatry: a narrative review - Vasilchenko - Consortium PSYCHIATRICUM, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/view/11244#!](https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/view/11244#!)

1. Researchers use artificial intelligence to diagnose depression - ScienceDaily, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2024/11/241120121844.htm](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2024/11/241120121844.htm)

1. AI Mental Health Research Hub Partnership | President's Bulletin - SUNY Downstate, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.downstate.edu/about/office-of-the-president/presidents-bulletin/2025/04-22/ai-mental-health-global-research-hub.html](https://www.downstate.edu/about/office-of-the-president/presidents-bulletin/2025/04-22/ai-mental-health-global-research-hub.html)

1. Artificial Intelligence for Mental Health | Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences | Stanford Medicine, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://ai4mh.stanford.edu/](https://ai4mh.stanford.edu/)

1. Penn Researcher Awarded $8 Million to Advance Mental Health Diagnostics Using AI, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://ldi.upenn.edu/our-work/research-updates/penn-researcher-awarded-8-million-to-advance-mental-health-diagnostics-using-ai/](https://ldi.upenn.edu/our-work/research-updates/penn-researcher-awarded-8-million-to-advance-mental-health-diagnostics-using-ai/)

1. Center Decoding Mental Health - Cincinnati Children's Hospital, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/research/divisions/d/decoding-mental-health](https://www.cincinnatichildrens.org/research/divisions/d/decoding-mental-health)

1. Patient Perspectives on AI for Mental Health Care: Cross-Sectional Survey Study - PubMed, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39293056/](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39293056/)

1. Patient Perspectives on AI for Mental Health: With Great [Computing] Power, Comes Great Responsibility - ResearchGate, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377514246_Patient_Perspectives_on_AI_for_Mental_Health_With_Great_Computing_Power_Comes_Great_Responsibility](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377514246_Patient_Perspectives_on_AI_for_Mental_Health_With_Great_Computing_Power_Comes_Great_Responsibility)

1. Patient Perspectives on AI for Mental Health Care: Cross-Sectional Survey Study - PMC, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11447436/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC11447436/)

1. With Great Power, Comes Great Responsibility: Unpacking Views on Using AI for Mental Health Care | Columbia School of Nursing, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.nursing.columbia.edu/news/great-power-comes-great-responsibility-unpacking-views-using-ai-mental-health-care](https://www.nursing.columbia.edu/news/great-power-comes-great-responsibility-unpacking-views-using-ai-mental-health-care)

1. Differing perspectives on artificial intelligence in mental healthcare among patients: a cross-sectional survey study - Frontiers, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/digital-health/articles/10.3389/fdgth.2024.1410758/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/digital-health/articles/10.3389/fdgth.2024.1410758/full)

1. Differing perspectives on artificial intelligence in mental healthcare among patients: a cross-sectional survey study. - VIVO, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://vivo.weill.cornell.edu/display/pubid39679142](https://vivo.weill.cornell.edu/display/pubid39679142)

1. Physician Perspectives on the Potential Benefits and Risks of Applying Artificial Intelligence in Psychiatric Medicine: Qualitative Study - JMIR Mental Health - Journal of Medical Internet Research, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e64414](https://mental.jmir.org/2025/1/e64414)

1. Use of AI in Mental Health Care: Community and Mental Health Professionals Survey, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://mental.jmir.org/2024/1/e60589](https://mental.jmir.org/2024/1/e60589)

1. Balancing Risks and Benefits: Clinicians' Perspectives on the Use of Generative AI Chatbots in Mental Healthcare - Frontiers, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/digital-health/articles/10.3389/fdgth.2025.1606291/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/digital-health/articles/10.3389/fdgth.2025.1606291/full)

1. Current Status, Challenges and Future Prospects in Computational Psychiatry: A Narrative Review - Consortium PSYCHIATRICUM, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/viewFile/11244/pdf](https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/viewFile/11244/pdf)

1. AI ethics in computational psychiatry: From the neuroscience of consciousness to the ethics of consciousness - PMC - PubMed Central, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9125160/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9125160/)

1. Out of their minds? Externalist challenges for using AI in forensic psychiatry - Frontiers, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychiatry/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1209862/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychiatry/articles/10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1209862/full)

1. Opportunities, applications, challenges and ethical implications of artificial intelligence in psychiatry: a narrative review - ResearchGate, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/371731531_Opportunities_applications_challenges_and_ethical_implications_of_artificial_intelligence_in_psychiatry_a_narrative_review](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/371731531_Opportunities_applications_challenges_and_ethical_implications_of_artificial_intelligence_in_psychiatry_a_narrative_review)

1. Current status, challenges and future prospects in computational psychiatry: a narrative review - Consortium PSYCHIATRICUM, accessed May 19, 2025, [https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/view/11244](https://consortium-psy.com/jour/article/view/11244)

\*\*
