# Response from Gemini

\*\*

# AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence for Proactive Biodiversity

Conservation, Climate Adaptation, and Planetary Health Restoration

1\. Introduction: The Urgency of Planetary Health and the Promise of AI

The planet is facing an interconnected crisis characterized by escalating
rates of biodiversity loss and the accelerating impacts of climate change.
Biodiversity, the variety of life in an ecosystem, plays a vital role in
maintaining the balance and resilience of natural environments.1 Just as
diverse data inputs fuel the adaptability and intelligence of artificial
intelligence, biodiversity makes ecosystems strong and capable of withstanding
disruptions.1 The current rates of species extinction and habitat degradation
threaten this essential diversity, impacting ecosystem functions and
ultimately undermining planetary health.2

Compounding the biodiversity crisis are the growing impacts of climate change,
which are manifesting in more frequent and intense extreme weather events,
rising sea levels, and widespread habitat degradation.4 These changes are not
only affecting natural ecosystems but also posing significant challenges to
human societies and infrastructure.5 The need for proactive and adaptive
solutions to these interconnected environmental problems has never been more
urgent. Climate change acts as a significant stressor on already fragile
ecosystems, further emphasizing the urgency for advanced tools to understand
and respond to these impacts.4 The urgency necessitates a shift from reactive
conservation efforts to strategies that can anticipate and mitigate future
environmental challenges.

The concept of planetary health recognizes the profound interdependence
between human and natural systems.7 It emphasizes the need for integrated
solutions that address environmental, social, and economic dimensions
simultaneously.7 This holistic framework aligns with the multifaceted
applications of artificial intelligence in sustainability, suggesting that
effective solutions require a comprehensive and interconnected approach.9
Addressing the complex challenges of planetary health demands a systems-level
understanding, and artificial intelligence, with its capacity to analyze
intricate and interconnected data, is uniquely positioned to contribute to
this understanding and the development of integrated solutions that consider
various interacting factors.

Artificial intelligence (AI) stands out as a transformative technology with
the potential to revolutionize our approach to these pressing environmental
challenges.10 Its ability to process vast amounts of data, discern complex
patterns, and generate predictions offers capabilities that traditional
environmental monitoring and management methods often lack.10 This suggests a
fundamental shift in how we can understand and interact with the environment,
moving towards more informed and proactive strategies. This report introduces
the concept of AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence as the application of
artificial intelligence to understand, monitor, predict, and manage global
ecosystems for proactive conservation, climate adaptation, and planetary
health restoration. This encompasses a wide array of AI applications, ranging
from sophisticated data analysis and predictive modeling to advanced
automation and decision support systems, all with a central focus on improving
the health and resilience of our planet's ecosystems.

2\. Defining AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence

At its core, AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence is built upon several key
components. The first is the acquisition and integration of data from diverse
sources.8 This includes a wide range of information such as satellite imagery
providing a broad spatial view, sensor networks (including acoustic sensors
and those detecting environmental DNA) offering detailed local data,
observations from citizen science initiatives contributing large-scale
information, and the valuable insights from traditional ecological knowledge
held by indigenous communities.8 The effectiveness of AI in understanding
global ecosystems is fundamentally dependent on the availability of high-
quality data from these varied sources and the ability to integrate them
seamlessly.

The second core component involves the application of various AI algorithms
and techniques.9 These include machine learning, which itself encompasses
supervised learning for tasks like classification, unsupervised learning for
discovering hidden patterns, and reinforcement learning for decision-making in
complex environments.9 Deep learning, a subset of machine learning, is
particularly useful for analyzing complex data like images and sounds.13
Computer vision enables AI to interpret visual information from sources like
satellite images and camera traps.13 Natural language processing allows AI to
understand and process textual data, while predictive analytics focuses on
forecasting future trends and events.11 The diverse nature of ecological
challenges often requires the application of different AI techniques,
highlighting the need for a versatile and adaptable approach.

Finally, stakeholder collaboration forms a crucial component.8 Building and
utilizing AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence requires effective
collaboration among a wide range of stakeholders, including researchers who
develop the AI models, conservationists who apply them in the field,
policymakers who use the insights for decision-making, local communities who
are often directly impacted by environmental changes, and technology
developers who create the necessary tools and infrastructure.8 This multi-
stakeholder approach ensures that the AI systems are relevant to real-world
problems, usable by those who need them, and that ethical considerations are
properly addressed throughout the development and implementation process.

AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence offers several key functionalities.
One of the most important is real-time monitoring and analysis of
ecosystems.18 AI systems can continuously process data streams from various
sensors and platforms, enabling the detection of changes, anomalies, and
potential threats as they occur.18 This real-time capability allows for more
timely interventions and a more dynamic understanding of ecological processes
that can change rapidly.

Another crucial functionality is predictive modeling and forecasting.14 By
analyzing historical data and current trends, AI can forecast future states of
ecosystems, including aspects like species distribution, habitat suitability,
the impacts of climate change, and potential ecological threats such as
deforestation or poaching.14 These predictive capabilities are essential for
proactive conservation and adaptation planning, allowing for a shift from
simply reacting to environmental problems to anticipating and preparing for
them.

Furthermore, AI plays a significant role in decision support and
optimization.14 By analyzing complex datasets and considering various factors,
AI can assist in making more informed conservation and management decisions.14
This includes optimizing the allocation of limited resources to achieve
conservation goals more efficiently and evaluating the potential effectiveness
of different conservation interventions before they are implemented.

Several distinguishing features set AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence
apart. One is its global scale perspective.7 AI's ability to integrate and
analyze data from across the planet provides a comprehensive understanding of
how ecosystems are interconnected and how changes in one region can affect
others.7 This global view is crucial for addressing environmental challenges
that transcend national borders. Another distinguishing feature is its
proactive and adaptive nature.9 Unlike traditional static approaches, AI
systems can continuously learn from new data and adapt their strategies in
response to changing environmental conditions, making them particularly well-
suited for managing the dynamic and complex nature of global ecosystems.9

3\. Leveraging AI for Proactive Biodiversity Conservation

Artificial intelligence is proving to be an invaluable tool in the realm of
proactive biodiversity conservation, offering capabilities that enhance our
ability to monitor, understand, and protect the planet's diverse species. One
of the most significant applications lies in enhanced species monitoring and
identification.3 AI-powered image recognition and deep learning algorithms can
analyze the vast amounts of data generated from various sources, including
camera traps that capture images of wildlife in their natural habitats, high-
resolution satellite imagery providing a bird's-eye view of ecosystems, and
acoustic recordings that capture the sounds of different species.3 These AI
systems can swiftly and accurately identify different species, track their
populations, and detect changes in their habitats, significantly increasing
the efficiency and accuracy of monitoring efforts.3

Several real-world applications demonstrate the effectiveness of AI in species
monitoring. For example, [Wildlife
Insights](https://www.wildlifeinsights.org/) uses AI to manage, analyze, and
share camera trap data, enabling quicker responses to threats.14
The([https://birdnet.cornell.edu/](https://birdnet.cornell.edu/)) project at
the Cornell Lab of Ornithology employs AI to identify over 3,000 bird species
from audio recordings, allowing scientists and citizen scientists to
contribute to biodiversity monitoring on an unprecedented scale.16 AI is also
being used to analyze photographs submitted by citizen scientists and
researchers to track the movements and populations of endangered whale sharks
worldwide.15 These examples highlight the practical utility of AI in
monitoring diverse species across various environments.

Furthermore, AI is enhancing our ability to monitor biodiversity through its
application in environmental DNA (eDNA) analysis.14 eDNA sampling involves
collecting and analyzing DNA traces present in environmental samples such as
water or soil to detect the presence of species, even those that are elusive
or cryptic and difficult to observe directly.28 AI algorithms are crucial for
processing the vast amounts of genomic data generated from eDNA samples,
enabling scientists to identify the presence and abundance of different
species in a non-invasive and cost-effective manner.14

Beyond monitoring, AI is playing a critical role in predictive modeling for
habitat conservation.15 AI algorithms can analyze various environmental data,
including climate variables, land use patterns, and ecological
characteristics, to forecast future changes in habitat suitability for
vulnerable species.15 This capability empowers conservation planners to
prioritize areas for protection, identify corridors for wildlife movement, and
develop proactive conservation strategies to mitigate the effects of habitat
loss and climate change.15 For instance, AI-powered predictive modeling tools
can assess habitat suitability and guide conservation planning in ecologically
significant areas around the world.15 The \[Forest
Foresight\](https://www.worldwildlife.org/magazine/issues/winter-2023/articles/could-
ai-help-stop-deforestation-before-it-starts) project run by the WWF was able
to predict deforestation based on satellite input data with 80% accuracy,
demonstrating AI's ability to anticipate environmental risks.14 AI is also
being used to identify key habitat corridors that facilitate species movement
between fragmented habitats, which is vital for maintaining genetic diversity
and allowing species to adapt to changing environmental conditions.15

Artificial intelligence is also proving to be a powerful tool in combating
illegal wildlife trafficking and poaching.15 AI technologies can analyze vast
quantities of data from various sources, including social media platforms,
online marketplaces, shipping records, and sensor networks deployed in
protected areas, to detect patterns, anomalies, and trends that are indicative
of wildlife crime.15 This provides law enforcement agencies with valuable
intelligence to target and disrupt criminal networks involved in the illegal
trade of endangered species and their products.15 Platforms like SMART
(Spatial Monitoring and Reporting Tool) and PAWS (Protection Assistant for
Wildlife Security) utilize AI algorithms to analyze patrol data, camera trap
footage, and other information to predict poaching hotspots and optimize the
deployment of ranger patrols, leading to more effective anti-poaching
efforts.16

AI is also enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of conservation
investments and planning.14 By analyzing diverse datasets that include
information on habitat connectivity, genetic diversity, species interactions,
and conservation costs, AI can help optimize conservation strategies, ensuring
that resources are allocated in the most impactful way.14 The Conservation
Area Prioritization Through Artificial Intelligence (CAPTAIN) project, for
example, used reinforcement learning to train models for conservation
prioritization that best use available data and resources to optimize
conservation efforts, demonstrating the effectiveness of AI in identifying
priority conservation areas.14

Finally, AI is playing a crucial role in citizen science and public engagement
in biodiversity conservation.15 AI-powered mobile apps and online platforms
provide user-friendly interfaces that enable volunteers to contribute valuable
data on species sightings, environmental conditions, and other ecological
information.15 These platforms often incorporate AI-driven image recognition
and other techniques to help users identify species and validate their
observations.16 Projects like iNaturalist utilize AI to help users identify
species from photographs, enhancing public engagement in conservation and
generating large datasets for scientific research.16

4\. AI-Powered Climate Adaptation Strategies

The escalating impacts of climate change necessitate innovative and effective
adaptation strategies, and artificial intelligence is emerging as a powerful
tool in this endeavor. AI excels at predictive modeling and developing early
warning systems for climate impacts.6 By analyzing vast datasets of historical
climate data, satellite imagery, and real-time sensor feeds, AI algorithms can
generate more accurate and timely forecasts of extreme weather events such as
hurricanes, floods, and droughts.6 These improved warnings allow communities,
infrastructure operators, and governments to prepare more effectively,
potentially reducing damage and saving lives.6 Beyond weather-related events,
AI is also being used to develop early warning systems for other ecological
threats, including disease outbreaks and potential ecosystem collapses, by
detecting subtle signals in environmental data that may precede these
crises.25

In the agricultural sector, AI-driven precision agriculture is enhancing
climate resilience.6 AI algorithms analyze data on soil conditions, weather
forecasts, and plant health to optimize irrigation, fertilization, and pest
management.6 This targeted approach minimizes resource waste, maximizes crop
yields, and enhances food security under changing climatic conditions.6 The
use of drones and satellite imagery, analyzed by AI, allows for the monitoring
of crop health over large areas, enabling timely interventions where needed.6

Water resource management and conservation are also benefiting significantly
from AI.6 AI models can analyze hydrological data, climate forecasts, and
water usage patterns to predict water availability, detect leaks in
distribution systems, and improve water allocation decisions, helping to
address growing water scarcity issues exacerbated by climate change.6 Smart
irrigation systems powered by AI can automatically adjust watering schedules
based on real-time weather conditions and soil moisture levels, further
conserving water in agriculture.6

Furthermore, AI is playing a crucial role in climate-resilient infrastructure
planning and management.6 By analyzing climate risk data, AI can help identify
vulnerabilities in existing infrastructure and guide the development of
climate-resilient designs for new infrastructure projects, from transportation
networks to buildings to water systems.6 AI-driven systems can also optimize
traffic flow in urban areas, reducing congestion and emissions, and manage
energy use in buildings to minimize waste and improve sustainability.53

5\. The Role of Multi-Scale Data Fusion in Climate Adaptation

A comprehensive understanding of climate change impacts and the development of
effective adaptation strategies require the integration of diverse data
streams from various sources and scales.6 This includes data from global
climate models providing large-scale projections, satellite imagery offering a
synoptic view of the Earth's surface, ground-based sensor networks capturing
local environmental conditions, and even socio-economic data reflecting human
activities and vulnerabilities.6 AI algorithms are particularly well-suited
for processing and analyzing such heterogeneous datasets, identifying complex
patterns and relationships that might be missed by traditional analytical
methods.44

The fusion of data from different spatial and temporal scales enhances the
accuracy and resolution of climate models and impact projections.48 For
instance, AI models can integrate global climate model outputs with regional
climate data and local sensor measurements to provide more detailed and
reliable predictions of climate change impacts at local and regional levels,
which are crucial for effective adaptation planning.48 An example of this is a
research project that leveraged multimodal generative artificial intelligence,
integrating satellite imagery, ground-based sensor networks, historical crop
data, and local farming practices to generate context-specific agricultural
recommendations for climate adaptation.68 Another study developed a method to
enhance land surface temperature estimation by integrating ECOSTRESS satellite
data with high-temporal-resolution meteorological data using AI, improving
spatial and temporal coverage.73 These examples demonstrate the tangible
benefits of data fusion in improving our understanding of climate change
impacts.

Multi-scale data fusion also supports the development of adaptation strategies
tailored to specific local conditions and vulnerabilities.68 Climate change
impacts are not uniform across the globe, and adaptation measures need to be
context-specific to be effective.68 By integrating climate and environmental
data with socio-economic information, AI can help inform adaptation planning
that considers human factors, such as the vulnerability of specific
communities or the economic implications of different adaptation options.68
This ensures that adaptation strategies are not only environmentally sound but
also socially equitable and economically feasible.

6\. Predicting and Mitigating Ecological Crises with AI

Artificial intelligence is playing an increasingly vital role in predicting
and mitigating a wide range of ecological crises. AI is instrumental in
developing and enhancing early warning systems for environmental threats.5 By
analyzing real-time data from diverse sources such as satellite imagery,
sensor networks, and social media, AI algorithms can detect early signs of
impending ecological threats, including wildfires, floods, pollution
outbreaks, and the spread of diseases.5 This early detection enables more
timely interventions, potentially reducing the severity and impact of these
crises. For example, AI-powered systems are being used to detect deforestation
in near real-time using satellite imagery, to predict the behavior and spread
of wildfires by analyzing weather patterns and terrain data, and to monitor
air and water quality through networks of smart sensors.26

Furthermore, AI and machine learning algorithms are being employed to predict
ecological tipping points.80 These are critical thresholds in ecosystems
beyond which changes can become rapid and potentially irreversible.80 By
analyzing complex ecological data, AI can help identify early warning signals
that indicate an ecosystem is approaching a tipping point, such as shifts in
species behavior or changes in environmental conditions.80 Research is
underway to use AI to forecast climate tipping points, predict pandemics, and
detect potential ecological collapses, providing an opportunity for proactive
measures to prevent these catastrophic shifts.82

In addition to prediction, AI can assist in mitigating ecological crises
through AI-driven interventions.25 During a crisis, such as a natural
disaster, AI can analyze real-time information to help plan and optimize
response efforts, including the allocation of resources and the coordination
of emergency services.25 AI-powered drones equipped with sensors can be
rapidly deployed to assess the extent of damage in affected areas, providing
timely and detailed information to guide rescue and recovery operations.29
These drones can also be used for targeted conservation interventions, such as
delivering seeds for reforestation or applying treatments to combat invasive
species.29

7\. Towards a Planetary Digital Twin for Holistic Ecosystem Management

The concept of a planetary digital twin is gaining traction as a powerful tool
for achieving holistic ecosystem management.91 A planetary digital twin can be
defined as a highly accurate virtual representation of the Earth system,
integrating diverse data sources and complex models to simulate its behavior
and evolution over time.91 This virtual replica aims to mirror the intricate
processes and interactions within the Earth's physical, biological, and social
components, providing a comprehensive platform for understanding and managing
our planet.95 Initiatives such as the European Commission's Destination Earth
(DestinE) and NVIDIA's Earth-2 represent significant efforts to build such
sophisticated digital twins, highlighting the growing global interest in their
potential.57

The potential applications of a planetary digital twin for ecosystem
management are vast. It can be used for comprehensive environmental
assessment, allowing for the continuous monitoring of ecosystem health and the
tracking of environmental changes over time by integrating diverse data
layers.92 A digital twin can also be instrumental in simulating the impacts of
climate change on ecosystems, enabling researchers and policymakers to explore
different adaptation and mitigation scenarios in a virtual environment before
implementing them in the real world.57 Furthermore, a planetary digital twin
has the potential for optimizing resource management, predicting natural
disasters with greater accuracy, and supporting sustainable development by
providing a platform to assess the environmental impacts of various human
activities and policies.57

8\. AI as the Engine of a Planetary Digital Twin

Artificial intelligence is the driving force behind the realization of a
planetary digital twin. The sheer scale and complexity of the data required to
build and continuously update such a virtual representation of the Earth
system necessitate the powerful processing capabilities of AI and machine
learning.57 AI algorithms play a crucial role in data assimilation and fusion,
intelligently combining observational data from various sources, such as
satellites and sensors, with the outputs of complex Earth system models to
create a more accurate and comprehensive representation of the planet's
current state within the digital twin.92

Within a planetary digital twin, AI also powers the forecasting models,
enabling real-time or near-real-time predictions of future states of the Earth
system.57 By analyzing vast amounts of historical and real-time data, AI
algorithms can learn intricate patterns and relationships, allowing them to
generate more accurate and timely predictions of weather patterns, climate
change impacts, and extreme events.57 Furthermore, AI facilitates scenario
planning and impact assessment within the digital twin.57 Users can explore
"what-if" questions related to environmental changes or policy decisions, and
the AI-powered digital twin can simulate potential outcomes, providing a
virtual laboratory for testing different environmental management strategies
before their real-world implementation.57

Beyond data processing and simulation, AI plays a vital role in extracting AI-
driven insights and providing decision support from the vast datasets within a
planetary digital twin.95 AI algorithms can identify subtle patterns, complex
relationships, and anomalies in Earth system data that might be difficult for
human analysts to detect, offering valuable information for more informed
decision-making.95 The development of AI digital assistants that can interact
with digital twins using natural language further enhances accessibility,
making complex Earth observation data and insights more readily available to a
wider range of users, including non-experts.113

9\. Integrating Indigenous Knowledge and Ethical Considerations

The integration of Indigenous Knowledge Systems (IKS) offers a valuable and
often overlooked dimension to AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence.116
Indigenous communities have accumulated profound environmental insights and
sustainable practices over generations through their close relationship with
the land.116 This knowledge provides unique, context-specific solutions and a
holistic understanding of ecosystems that can significantly complement
scientific approaches to biodiversity conservation, sustainable resource
management, and climate resilience.116

Artificial intelligence offers opportunities to analyze, preserve, and scale
up this wealth of indigenous knowledge for wider application.119 Projects that
combine IKS with AI for climate adaptation, such as predicting optimal fishing
locations based on traditional ecological knowledge and environmental data, or
utilizing indigenous knowledge in AI models for reef restoration, demonstrate
the potential for synergistic benefits.119

However, the integration of AI with ecosystem intelligence necessitates
careful consideration of ethical implications. Data sovereignty is paramount,
ensuring that Indigenous communities retain control over their knowledge and
data.22 It is crucial to respect their rights and autonomy regarding their
traditional knowledge and to prevent its misuse or exploitation.22
Furthermore, it is essential to address potential biases in AI algorithms and
strive for fairness, transparency, and accountability in the development and
deployment of these systems.5 AI models trained on biased data can perpetuate
existing inequalities, making it imperative to ensure responsible and ethical
use in environmental management.5 Finally, community engagement and
participatory approaches are vital in developing AI solutions for
environmental management, ensuring that these tools are relevant, effective,
and ethically sound, reflecting the needs and values of the communities that
will use them.22

10\. Global Initiatives and Future Directions

Numerous global initiatives are already leveraging AI for biodiversity
conservation, climate adaptation, and planetary health restoration,
demonstrating the power of this technology in addressing environmental
challenges.4 Organizations like the Global AI Ecosystem are fostering
knowledge and collaboration within the AI industry for sustainability.7
Microsoft's AI for Earth program supports projects using AI to address
environmental challenges.16 UNEP's World Environment Situation Room leverages
AI for real-time environmental analysis.4 Furthermore, various digital twin
projects, such as Destination Earth and NVIDIA's Earth-2, are pushing the
boundaries of our ability to model and understand the planet.57

The future holds immense potential for further advancements in AI algorithms,
data availability, and computing power to enhance AI-Driven Global Ecosystem
Intelligence.5 Emerging trends like the use of generative AI for creating
sophisticated ecosystem models and the increasing integration of AI with
robotics for automated conservation interventions highlight the innovative
potential of this field.14

Despite the promise, several key challenges must be addressed to fully realize
the potential of AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence.3 These include
addressing data gaps and ensuring the availability of high-quality,
comprehensive datasets, mitigating biases in AI models to ensure fair and
equitable outcomes, managing the significant computational demands of training
and running complex AI systems, carefully navigating the ethical
considerations surrounding data privacy, algorithmic transparency, and the
potential impacts on local communities, and fostering effective
interdisciplinary collaboration among experts from diverse fields to ensure
that AI solutions are scientifically sound and practically applicable.

To advance this field responsibly and effectively, several recommendations can
be made. Researchers should focus on developing more robust and explainable AI
algorithms, addressing data gaps through innovative data collection methods
and data sharing initiatives, and rigorously evaluating the performance and
potential biases of AI models in environmental contexts. Policymakers should
establish clear guidelines and regulations for the ethical development and
deployment of AI in environmental applications, promote data accessibility
while ensuring data sovereignty, and invest in the necessary infrastructure
and training to support the adoption of AI-driven solutions. Practitioners
should prioritize community engagement in the development and implementation
of AI tools, ensure that these tools are user-friendly and relevant to local
needs, and foster collaboration with AI experts to leverage the full potential
of this technology for conservation and restoration efforts.

11\. Conclusion: Realizing the Potential of AI for Planetary Health
Restoration

In conclusion, AI-Driven Global Ecosystem Intelligence holds immense
transformative potential for addressing the urgent and interconnected
environmental challenges facing our planet. By leveraging the power of
artificial intelligence to understand, monitor, predict, and manage global
ecosystems, we can significantly enhance our efforts in proactive biodiversity
conservation, climate adaptation, and planetary health restoration. The
ability of AI to process vast amounts of data, identify complex patterns, and
generate insightful predictions provides us with unprecedented opportunities
to anticipate and mitigate ecological crises, optimize conservation
strategies, and move towards a more sustainable future.

The path forward requires continued research and development in AI algorithms
and their application to environmental science, alongside increased data
availability and computational resources. Fostering collaboration among
researchers, policymakers, practitioners, and local communities is crucial to
ensure that AI solutions are effective, ethical, and relevant to real-world
needs. By embracing the potential of AI and addressing the associated
challenges thoughtfully and proactively, we can harness its power to create a
healthier and more resilient planet for current and future generations. The
urgent need for integrated and innovative solutions to the interconnected
environmental challenges demands that we fully explore and responsibly utilize
the transformative capabilities of AI in this critical endeavor.

#### Works cited

1. AI's role in protecting biodiversity | IBM, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.ibm.com/think/news/ai-role-biodiversity](https://www.ibm.com/think/news/ai-role-biodiversity)

1. The role of big data and AI in enhancing biodiversity conservation and resource management in the USA, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://wjarr.com/sites/default/files/WJARR-2024-2350.pdf](https://wjarr.com/sites/default/files/WJARR-2024-2350.pdf)

1. AI has untapped potential to advance biodiversity conservation, study finds | Newsroom, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.mcgill.ca/newsroom/channels/news/ai-has-untapped-potential-advance-biodiversity-conservation-study-finds-364117](https://www.mcgill.ca/newsroom/channels/news/ai-has-untapped-potential-advance-biodiversity-conservation-study-finds-364117)

1. How artificial intelligence is helping tackle environmental challenges, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/how-artificial-intelligence-helping-tackle-environmental-challenges](https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/how-artificial-intelligence-helping-tackle-environmental-challenges)

1. AI and environmental challenges | UPenn EII, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://environment.upenn.edu/news-events/news/ai-and-environmental-challenges](https://environment.upenn.edu/news-events/news/ai-and-environmental-challenges)

1. Future of AI-Driven Climate Change Adaptation Strategies - Prism → Sustainability Directory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/future-of-ai-driven-climate-change-adaptation-strategies/](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/future-of-ai-driven-climate-change-adaptation-strategies/)

1. prism.sustainability-directory.com, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/term/global-ai-ecosystems/#:~:text=A%20Global%20AI%20Ecosystem%20is,context%20of%20sustainability%2C%20AI%20offers](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/term/global-ai-ecosystems/#:~:text=A%20Global%20AI%20Ecosystem%20is,context%20of%20sustainability%2C%20AI%20offers)

1. Global AI Ecosystems → Term - Prism → Sustainability Directory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/term/global-ai-ecosystems/](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/term/global-ai-ecosystems/)

1. AI-Driven Systems → Definition → Term - Sustainability Directory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://sustainability-directory.com/term/definition/ai-driven-systems/](https://sustainability-directory.com/term/definition/ai-driven-systems/)

1. Artificial intelligence ecosystem - Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://ised-isde.canada.ca/site/ised/en/artificial-intelligence-ecosystem](https://ised-isde.canada.ca/site/ised/en/artificial-intelligence-ecosystem)

1. What Is Artificial Intelligence (AI)? | Google Cloud, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://cloud.google.com/learn/what-is-artificial-intelligence](https://cloud.google.com/learn/what-is-artificial-intelligence)

1. What Is Artificial Intelligence (AI)? - IBM, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/artificial-intelligence](https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/artificial-intelligence)

1. Artificial intelligence - Wikipedia, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Artificial_intelligence)

1. Algorithms and ecosystems: AI in biodiversity conservation, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.imd.org/ibyimd/sustainability/algorithms-and-ecosystems/](https://www.imd.org/ibyimd/sustainability/algorithms-and-ecosystems/)

1. Harnessing AI to safeguard biodiversity: five innovative approaches | Saïd Business School, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/oxford-experience/blogs/sandra-topic/harnessing-ai-safeguard-biodiversity-five-innovative-approaches](https://www.sbs.ox.ac.uk/oxford-experience/blogs/sandra-topic/harnessing-ai-safeguard-biodiversity-five-innovative-approaches)

1. Protecting Biodiversity: Innovations In AI/ML For Wildlife ..., accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.enfuse-solutions.com/protecting-biodiversity-innovations-in-ai-ml-for-wildlife-conservation/](https://www.enfuse-solutions.com/protecting-biodiversity-innovations-in-ai-ml-for-wildlife-conservation/)

1. Biodiversity Needs AI: Infusing Intelligence into Biodiversity Preservation and Restoration, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://cmr.berkeley.edu/2023/09/biodiversity-needs-ai-infusing-intelligence-into-biodiversity-preservation-and-restoration/](https://cmr.berkeley.edu/2023/09/biodiversity-needs-ai-infusing-intelligence-into-biodiversity-preservation-and-restoration/)

1. AI-Driven Conservation Monitoring in Protected Areas - Prism → Sustainability Directory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-driven-conservation-monitoring-in-protected-areas/](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-driven-conservation-monitoring-in-protected-areas/)

1. AI Ecosystem Guide 2025: Learning AI Models and Methods - CMARIX, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.cmarix.com/blog/ai-ecosystem-models-and-methods/](https://www.cmarix.com/blog/ai-ecosystem-models-and-methods/)

1. Global AI Industry Ecosystem - Deep Knowledge Group, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://analytics.dkv.global/ai-ecosystem/deck.pdf](https://analytics.dkv.global/ai-ecosystem/deck.pdf)

1. AI ON BIODIVERSITY & SPECIES LOSS - Betts Ecology, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.bettsecology.co.uk/insight/ai-on-biodiversity-species-loss](https://www.bettsecology.co.uk/insight/ai-on-biodiversity-species-loss)

1. AI Driven Conservation Data Justice? → Scenario - Prism → Sustainability Directory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-driven-conservation-data-justice/](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-driven-conservation-data-justice/)

1. The Future of Intelligent Connectivity: Understanding AI-Driven Network Infrastructure, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.nsi1.com/blog/ai-driven-network-infrastructure](https://www.nsi1.com/blog/ai-driven-network-infrastructure)

1. www.researchgate.net, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390364980_The_Role_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_Environmental_Conservation#:~:text=AI%2Ddriven%20technologies%2C%20such%20as,habitat%20assessment%2C%20and%20disaster%20prediction.](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/390364980_The_Role_of_Artificial_Intelligence_in_Environmental_Conservation#:~:text=AI%2Ddriven%20technologies%2C%20such%20as,habitat%20assessment%2C%20and%20disaster%20prediction.)

1. AI is Transforming Environmental Monitoring and Conservation - Makersite, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://makersite.io/how-ai-is-transforming-environmental-monitoring-and-conservation/](https://makersite.io/how-ai-is-transforming-environmental-monitoring-and-conservation/)

1. AI for Environmental Monitoring: Benefits, Uses & Innovation, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.sandtech.com/insight/ai-for-environmental-monitoring/](https://www.sandtech.com/insight/ai-for-environmental-monitoring/)

1. Use Cases of AI Technology in Environmental Services | Matidor, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://matidor.com/blog/use-cases-of-ai-technology-in-environmental-services/](https://matidor.com/blog/use-cases-of-ai-technology-in-environmental-services/)

1. AI in conservation: Where we came from and where we are heading, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/03/ai-in-conservation-where-we-came-from-and-where-we-are-heading/](https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/03/ai-in-conservation-where-we-came-from-and-where-we-are-heading/)

1. Predictive AI and Proactive Biodiversity Conservation Planning ..., accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/predictive-ai-and-proactive-biodiversity-conservation-planning/](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/predictive-ai-and-proactive-biodiversity-conservation-planning/)

1. Adaptive AI: Revolutionizing Biodiversity Conservation in Dynamic Environmental Systems, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://youaccel.com/blog/adaptive-ai-revolutionizing-biodiversity-conservation-in-dynamic-environmental-systems](https://youaccel.com/blog/adaptive-ai-revolutionizing-biodiversity-conservation-in-dynamic-environmental-systems)

1. Empowering Conservation Efforts with Artificial Intelligence | CPAG RIH, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://caribbeanprotectedareasgateway.org/empowering-conservation-efforts](https://caribbeanprotectedareasgateway.org/empowering-conservation-efforts)

1. How AI is Transforming Wildlife Conservation - TGI, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.tabsgi.com/how-ai-is-transforming-wildlife-conservation/](https://www.tabsgi.com/how-ai-is-transforming-wildlife-conservation/)

1. www.imd.org, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.imd.org/ibyimd/sustainability/algorithms-and-ecosystems/#:~:text=AI%20is%20processing%20increasingly%20large,%2C%20management%2C%20or%20credit%20issuance.](https://www.imd.org/ibyimd/sustainability/algorithms-and-ecosystems/#:~:text=AI%20is%20processing%20increasingly%20large,%2C%20management%2C%20or%20credit%20issuance.)

1. Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Conservation - Zanza Africa, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.zanza-africa.com/ai-in-conservation](https://www.zanza-africa.com/ai-in-conservation)

1. Remote sensing and AI – Opportunities for biodiversity conservation and nature management? - Abdulhakim Abdi, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://hakimabdi.com/blog/remote-sensing-and-ai-opportunities-for-biodiversity-conservation-and-nature-management](https://hakimabdi.com/blog/remote-sensing-and-ai-opportunities-for-biodiversity-conservation-and-nature-management)

1. Use of AI in Conservation - Mammal Society, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://mammal.org.uk/position-statements/use-of-ai-in-conservation](https://mammal.org.uk/position-statements/use-of-ai-in-conservation)

1. AI in Wildlife Conservation: A Comprehensive Overview - Saiwa, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://saiwa.ai/blog/ai-in-wildlife-conservation/](https://saiwa.ai/blog/ai-in-wildlife-conservation/)

1. Reviewing the role of AI in environmental monitoring and conservation: A data-driven revolution for our planet - ResearchGate, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377807115_Reviewing_the_role_of_AI_in_environmental_monitoring_and_conservation_A_data-driven_revolution_for_our_planet](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377807115_Reviewing_the_role_of_AI_in_environmental_monitoring_and_conservation_A_data-driven_revolution_for_our_planet)

1. Reviewing the role of AI in environmental monitoring and conservation: A data-driven revolution for our planet, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://wjarr.com/content/reviewing-role-ai-environmental-monitoring-and-conservation-data-driven-revolution-our](https://wjarr.com/content/reviewing-role-ai-environmental-monitoring-and-conservation-data-driven-revolution-our)

1. Navigating the New Frontier: How the EU AI Act Will Impact the Conservation and Restoration of Biodiversity and Ecosystems Industry - BABL AI, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://babl.ai/navigating-the-new-frontier-how-the-eu-ai-act-will-impact-the-conservation-and-restoration-of-biodiversity-and-ecosystems-industry/](https://babl.ai/navigating-the-new-frontier-how-the-eu-ai-act-will-impact-the-conservation-and-restoration-of-biodiversity-and-ecosystems-industry/)

1. AI in Wildlife Conservation [5 Case Studies][2025] - DigitalDefynd, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://digitaldefynd.com/IQ/ai-in-wildlife-conservation/](https://digitaldefynd.com/IQ/ai-in-wildlife-conservation/)

1. Artificial Intelligence Meets Citizen Science to Supercharge Ecological Monitoring - PMC, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7660425/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7660425/)

1. How Marine Artificial Intelligence is Revolutionizing Ocean Conservation, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.marinebiodiversity.ca/2024/10/how-marine-artificial-intelligence-is-revolutionizing-ocean-conservation/](https://www.marinebiodiversity.ca/2024/10/how-marine-artificial-intelligence-is-revolutionizing-ocean-conservation/)

1. AI for Climate Change: Innovative Models for Predicting Environmental Impact - Dataversity, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.dataversity.net/ai-for-climate-change-innovative-models-for-predicting-environmental-impact/](https://www.dataversity.net/ai-for-climate-change-innovative-models-for-predicting-environmental-impact/)

1. 9 ways AI is helping tackle climate change - The World Economic Forum, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/02/ai-combat-climate-change/](https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/02/ai-combat-climate-change/)

1. How can artificial intelligence help tackle climate change? - Greenly, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://greenly.earth/en-gb/blog/industries/how-can-artificial-intelligence-help-tackle-climate-change](https://greenly.earth/en-gb/blog/industries/how-can-artificial-intelligence-help-tackle-climate-change)

1. The Power of Artificial Intelligence in Climate Action: A Deep Dive into Key Applications, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://blog.dclimate.net/the-power-of-artificial-intelligence-in-climate-action-a-deep-dive-into-key-applications/](https://blog.dclimate.net/the-power-of-artificial-intelligence-in-climate-action-a-deep-dive-into-key-applications/)

1. How AI is Shaping the Future of Climate Data Collection and Analysis - Datafloq, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://datafloq.com/read/how-ai-is-shaping-the-future-of-climate-data-collection-and-analysis/](https://datafloq.com/read/how-ai-is-shaping-the-future-of-climate-data-collection-and-analysis/)

1. Deep learning model based on multi-scale feature fusion for precipitation nowcasting - GMD, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/17/53/2024/](https://gmd.copernicus.org/articles/17/53/2024/)

1. How AI Is Transforming Climate Change Prediction And Mitigation | Environmental Institute, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.environment.virginia.edu/news/how-ai-transforming-climate-change-prediction-and-mitigation](https://www.environment.virginia.edu/news/how-ai-transforming-climate-change-prediction-and-mitigation)

1. The role of AI in climate change | Predictions, solutions & challenges - WeAreTechWomen, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://wearetechwomen.com/the-role-of-ai-in-climate-change-predictions-solutions-challenges/](https://wearetechwomen.com/the-role-of-ai-in-climate-change-predictions-solutions-challenges/)

1. How can artificial intelligence help tackle climate change? - Greenly, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://greenly.earth/en-us/blog/industries/how-can-artificial-intelligence-help-tackle-climate-change](https://greenly.earth/en-us/blog/industries/how-can-artificial-intelligence-help-tackle-climate-change)

1. 10 ways AI is helping solve climate change - PVcase, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://pvcase.com/blog/10-ways-ai-is-helping-solve-climate-change/](https://pvcase.com/blog/10-ways-ai-is-helping-solve-climate-change/)

1. Harnessing the Power of AI to Combat Climate Change - Digest by The HEAD Foundation, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://digest.headfoundation.org/2024/07/10/harnessing-the-power-of-ai-to-combat-climate-change/](https://digest.headfoundation.org/2024/07/10/harnessing-the-power-of-ai-to-combat-climate-change/)

1. using artificial intelligence as a tool to create action plans : r/ClimateOffensive - Reddit, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.reddit.com/r/ClimateOffensive/comments/1h0db0u/using_artificial_intelligence_as_a_tool_to_create/](https://www.reddit.com/r/ClimateOffensive/comments/1h0db0u/using_artificial_intelligence_as_a_tool_to_create/)

1. Leveraging AI for climate adaptation: A new era for resilience - PreventionWeb.net, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.preventionweb.net/news/leveraging-ai-climate-adaptation-new-era-resilience](https://www.preventionweb.net/news/leveraging-ai-climate-adaptation-new-era-resilience)

1. AI-powered digital twins predict weather disasters - DataScienceCentral.com, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.datasciencecentral.com/ai-powered-digital-twins-predict-weather-disasters/](https://www.datasciencecentral.com/ai-powered-digital-twins-predict-weather-disasters/)

1. AI-powered 'digital twin' of Earth could make weather predictions at super speeds, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.livescience.com/planet-earth/climate-change/ai-powered-digital-twin-of-earth-could-make-weather-predictions-at-super-speeds](https://www.livescience.com/planet-earth/climate-change/ai-powered-digital-twin-of-earth-could-make-weather-predictions-at-super-speeds)

1. AI for Environmental Conservation: Predicting and Mitigating Natural Disasters, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://interviewkickstart.com/blogs/articles/ai-environmental-conservation-disaster-mitigation](https://interviewkickstart.com/blogs/articles/ai-environmental-conservation-disaster-mitigation)

1. Events - LEAP Panel: "AI for Early Warning Systems + Anticipatory Action" - Columbia AI, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://ai.columbia.edu/events/leap-panel-ai-early-warning-systems-anticipatory-action](https://ai.columbia.edu/events/leap-panel-ai-early-warning-systems-anticipatory-action)

1. Advancements in AI and ML for Early Warning Systems in Natural Disaster Detection - Apple Academic Press, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.appleacademicpress.com/advancements-in-ai-and-ml-for-early-warning-systems-in-natural-disaster-detection-future-trends-and-innovations/9781779643964](https://www.appleacademicpress.com/advancements-in-ai-and-ml-for-early-warning-systems-in-natural-disaster-detection-future-trends-and-innovations/9781779643964)

1. What are early warning systems and why do they matter for climate action?, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://climatepromise.undp.org/news-and-stories/what-are-early-warning-systems-and-why-do-they-matter-climate-action](https://climatepromise.undp.org/news-and-stories/what-are-early-warning-systems-and-why-do-they-matter-climate-action)

1. 5 Ways AI Can Strengthen Early Warning Systems | United Nations University, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://unu.edu/ehs/series/5-ways-ai-can-strengthen-early-warning-systems](https://unu.edu/ehs/series/5-ways-ai-can-strengthen-early-warning-systems)

1. AI for smart conservation - British Antarctic Survey - Project, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.bas.ac.uk/project/ai-for-smart-conservation/](https://www.bas.ac.uk/project/ai-for-smart-conservation/)

1. Harnessing the Power of AI to Combat Human-wildlife Conflict in Tadoba | Roundglass, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://roundglasssustain.com/conservation/human-animal-conflict-tadoba](https://roundglasssustain.com/conservation/human-animal-conflict-tadoba)

1. AI early warning system to help protect marine mammals | WWF South Africa, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.wwf.org.za/?46422/AI-early-warning-system-to-help-protect-marine-mammals](https://www.wwf.org.za/?46422/AI-early-warning-system-to-help-protect-marine-mammals)

1. Ai Powered Early Warning Systems And Community Preparedness → Scenario - Prism → Sustainability Directory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-powered-early-warning-systems-and-community-preparedness/](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-powered-early-warning-systems-and-community-preparedness/)

1. Multimodal Generative AI for Climate Adaptation and Agricultural Innovation - ResearchGate, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387398761_Multimodal_Generative_AI_for_Climate_Adaptation_and_Agricultural_Innovation](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387398761_Multimodal_Generative_AI_for_Climate_Adaptation_and_Agricultural_Innovation)

1. AI for Climate Change: Revolutionizing Solutions for a Sustainable Future - Transcend, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://transcendinfra.com/ai-for-climate-change/](https://transcendinfra.com/ai-for-climate-change/)

1. AI Driven Solutions for Climate Adaptation → Scenario - Prism → Sustainability Directory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-driven-solutions-for-climate-adaptation/](https://prism.sustainability-directory.com/scenario/ai-driven-solutions-for-climate-adaptation/)

1. The Promise and Potential Pitfalls of AI in Climate Change Mitigation | Steptoe, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.steptoe.com/en/news-publications/stepwise-risk-outlook/the-promise-and-potential-pitfalls-of-ai-in-climate-change-mitigation.html](https://www.steptoe.com/en/news-publications/stepwise-risk-outlook/the-promise-and-potential-pitfalls-of-ai-in-climate-change-mitigation.html)

1. Predictive modeling of climate change impacts using Artificial Intelligence: a review for equitable governance and sustainable outcome - PMC, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12014821/](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12014821/)

1. Harnessing Multi-Source Data and Deep Learning for High-Resolution Land Surface Temperature Gap-Filling Supporting Climate Change Adaptation Activities - MDPI, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/17/2/318](https://www.mdpi.com/2072-4292/17/2/318)

1. Causal inference in complex multiscale systems - CSIRO Research, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://research.csiro.au/ai4m/causal-inference-in-complex-multiscale-systems/](https://research.csiro.au/ai4m/causal-inference-in-complex-multiscale-systems/)

1. A Multimodal Data Fusion and Deep Learning Framework for Large-Scale Wildfire Surface Fuel Mapping - MDPI, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.mdpi.com/2571-6255/6/2/36](https://www.mdpi.com/2571-6255/6/2/36)

1. Using artificial intelligence and data fusion for environmental monitoring: A review and future perspectives | Request PDF - ResearchGate, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361539615_Using_artificial_intelligence_and_data_fusion_for_environmental_monitoring_A_review_and_future_perspectives](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/361539615_Using_artificial_intelligence_and_data_fusion_for_environmental_monitoring_A_review_and_future_perspectives)

1. pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12014821/#:~:text=The%20application%20of%20AI%20in,contributing%20to%20climate%20change%20impacts.](https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC12014821/#:~:text=The%20application%20of%20AI%20in,contributing%20to%20climate%20change%20impacts.)

1. Artificial intelligence and IoT driven technologies for environmental pollution monitoring and management - Frontiers, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/environmental-science/articles/10.3389/fenvs.2024.1336088/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/environmental-science/articles/10.3389/fenvs.2024.1336088/full)

1. 9 Ways AI Is Being Used to Help the Environment - CleanHub's Blog, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://blog.cleanhub.com/how-is-ai-being-used-to-help-the-environment](https://blog.cleanhub.com/how-is-ai-being-used-to-help-the-environment)

1. www.jhuapl.edu, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.jhuapl.edu/work/projects-and-missions/ai-tipping-point-discovery#:~:text=To%20understand%20how%20climate%20tipping,Intervention%20and%20Prediction%20(CATNIP).](<https://www.jhuapl.edu/work/projects-and-missions/ai-tipping-point-discovery#:~:text=To%20understand%20how%20climate%20tipping,Intervention%20and%20Prediction%20(CATNIP).>)

1. AI for Tipping Point Discovery | Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.jhuapl.edu/work/projects-and-missions/ai-tipping-point-discovery](https://www.jhuapl.edu/work/projects-and-missions/ai-tipping-point-discovery)

1. How AI is tackling the climate and environmental crisis | The University of Edinburgh, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.ed.ac.uk/ai/changing-lives/tackling-climate-environment-crisis](https://www.ed.ac.uk/ai/changing-lives/tackling-climate-environment-crisis)

1. AI Assistance for Climate Tipping Point Discovery, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://agu.confex.com/agu/agu24/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/1517174](https://agu.confex.com/agu/agu24/meetingapp.cgi/Paper/1517174)

1. 1.6.3.3 Applications of AI for predicting tipping points, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://report-2023.global-tipping-points.org/section1/1-earth-system-tipping-points/1-6-early-warning-signals-of-earth-system-tipping-points/1-6-3-recommendations-and-looking-ahead/1-6-3-3-applications-of-ai-for-predicting-tipping-points/](https://report-2023.global-tipping-points.org/section1/1-earth-system-tipping-points/1-6-early-warning-signals-of-earth-system-tipping-points/1-6-3-recommendations-and-looking-ahead/1-6-3-3-applications-of-ai-for-predicting-tipping-points/)

1. Applied mathematicians using artificial intelligence to reveal climate-change tipping points | Math e-Ties | University of Waterloo, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://uwaterloo.ca/math-alumni-newsletter/winter-2022/feature/applied-mathematicians-using-artificial-intelligence-reveal](https://uwaterloo.ca/math-alumni-newsletter/winter-2022/feature/applied-mathematicians-using-artificial-intelligence-reveal)

1. Deep learning for early warning signals of tipping points - PNAS, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2106140118](https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.2106140118)

1. AI Learns the Secrets of Tipping Points | Research Communities by Springer Nature, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://communities.springernature.com/posts/ai-learns-the-secrets-of-tipping-points](https://communities.springernature.com/posts/ai-learns-the-secrets-of-tipping-points)

1. AI can predict 'tipping points' for future disasters like pandemics or ecological collapse, scientists say | Live Science, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.livescience.com/technology/artificial-intelligence/new-ai-algorithm-can-predict-the-tipping-points-for-future-disasters-scientists-say](https://www.livescience.com/technology/artificial-intelligence/new-ai-algorithm-can-predict-the-tipping-points-for-future-disasters-scientists-say)

1. Chaos Researchers Can Now Predict Perilous Points of No Return - Quanta Magazine, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.quantamagazine.org/ai-algorithm-foresees-chaotic-tipping-points-20220915/](https://www.quantamagazine.org/ai-algorithm-foresees-chaotic-tipping-points-20220915/)

1. New algorithm cuts through 'noisy' data to better predict tipping points - University at Buffalo, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2024/04/new-algorithm-cuts-through-noisy-data-to-better-predict-tipping-points.html](https://www.buffalo.edu/news/releases/2024/04/new-algorithm-cuts-through-noisy-data-to-better-predict-tipping-points.html)

1. www.preventionweb.net, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.preventionweb.net/news/digital-twins-earth-misleading-term-computer-models-are-always-simplified-representation#:~:text=The%20term%20Digital%20Twin%20of,developments%20and%20extreme%20natural%20events.](https://www.preventionweb.net/news/digital-twins-earth-misleading-term-computer-models-are-always-simplified-representation#:~:text=The%20term%20Digital%20Twin%20of,developments%20and%20extreme%20natural%20events.)

1. Digital Twins - Helmholtz - Association of German Research Centres, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://earthenvironment.helmholtz.de/changing-earth/syncom/projects/digital-twins/](https://earthenvironment.helmholtz.de/changing-earth/syncom/projects/digital-twins/)

1. Digital Twins of the Earth is a misleading term as computer models are always a simplified representation of reality - PreventionWeb.net, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.preventionweb.net/news/digital-twins-earth-misleading-term-computer-models-are-always-simplified-representation](https://www.preventionweb.net/news/digital-twins-earth-misleading-term-computer-models-are-always-simplified-representation)

1. Digital Twin Earth: the next-generation Earth Information System - Frontiers, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/science/articles/10.3389/fsci.2024.1383659/full](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/science/articles/10.3389/fsci.2024.1383659/full)

1. Digital twin of earth: A novel information framework for managing a sustainable earth, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.the-innovation.org/article/doi/10.59717/j.xinn-geo.2024.100092](https://www.the-innovation.org/article/doi/10.59717/j.xinn-geo.2024.100092)

1. Digital Twin of Earth - Single.Earth, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.single.earth/digital-twin-of-earth](https://www.single.earth/digital-twin-of-earth)

1. Digital twin - Wikipedia, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_twin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Digital_twin)

1. What are Digital Twins and How do They Work? - Unity, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://unity.com/topics/digital-twin-definition](https://unity.com/topics/digital-twin-definition)

1. What Is a Digital Twin? | NVIDIA Blog, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/what-is-a-digital-twin/](https://blogs.nvidia.com/blog/what-is-a-digital-twin/)

1. Earth System Digital Twins - NASA Earth Science and Technology Office, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://esto.nasa.gov/earth-system-digital-twin/](https://esto.nasa.gov/earth-system-digital-twin/)

1. What is a Digital Twin? | GE Vernova, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.gevernova.com/software/blog/what-digital-twin](https://www.gevernova.com/software/blog/what-digital-twin)

1. The Digital Twins | Destination Earth - ECMWF, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://destine.ecmwf.int/digital-twins/](https://destine.ecmwf.int/digital-twins/)

1. NVIDIA Announces Earth Climate Digital Twin, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://nvidianews.nvidia.com/news/nvidia-announces-earth-climate-digital-twin](https://nvidianews.nvidia.com/news/nvidia-announces-earth-climate-digital-twin)

1. Build Planetary Digital Twin | CODES, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.codes.global/accelerate/build-planetary-digital-twin](https://www.codes.global/accelerate/build-planetary-digital-twin)

1. www.esri.com, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/blog/open-science-environmental-digital-twin#:~:text=The%20digital%20twin%20captures%20critical,accelerates%20understanding%20of%20natural%20processes.](https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/blog/open-science-environmental-digital-twin#:~:text=The%20digital%20twin%20captures%20critical,accelerates%20understanding%20of%20natural%20processes.)

1. Environmental Digital Twins and Earth Stewardship - Esri, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/blog/open-science-environmental-digital-twin](https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/blog/open-science-environmental-digital-twin)

1. The Digital Twin Earth Hydrology Platform - Frontiers, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/science/article-hubs/digital-twin-earth-dte-hydrology-water-cycle](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/science/article-hubs/digital-twin-earth-dte-hydrology-water-cycle)

1. Using digital twin technology to better understand environmental impact, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.pbctoday.co.uk/news/digital-construction-news/using-digital-twin-technology-understand-environmental-impact/122394/](https://www.pbctoday.co.uk/news/digital-construction-news/using-digital-twin-technology-understand-environmental-impact/122394/)

1. Climate Change Adaptation Digital Twin: a window to the future of our Planet, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://destine.ecmwf.int/news/climate-change-adaptation-digital-twin-a-window-to-the-future-of-our-planet/](https://destine.ecmwf.int/news/climate-change-adaptation-digital-twin-a-window-to-the-future-of-our-planet/)

1. Digital Twins Are Saving the Environment - Engineering.com, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.engineering.com/digital-twins-are-saving-the-environment/](https://www.engineering.com/digital-twins-are-saving-the-environment/)

1. Environment-Aware Digital Twins: Incorporating Weather and Climate Information to Support Risk-Based Decision-Making in - AMS Journals, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/aies/2/4/AIES-D-23-0023.1.xml](https://journals.ametsoc.org/view/journals/aies/2/4/AIES-D-23-0023.1.xml)

1. Digital Twins and the Success of Environmental Projects | InEight, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://ineight.com/blog/knowledge-times-two-digital-twins-and-the-success-of-environmental-projects/](https://ineight.com/blog/knowledge-times-two-digital-twins-and-the-success-of-environmental-projects/)

1. Earth-2: NVIDIA's Planet Digital Twin Launched - YouTube, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XzFMW1Pdrkc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XzFMW1Pdrkc)

1. A digital twin of the Earth: what are the risks? - CLICCS - Universität Hamburg, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.cliccs.uni-hamburg.de/about-cliccs/news/2024-news/2024-07-10-digital-twin-earth.html](https://www.cliccs.uni-hamburg.de/about-cliccs/news/2024-news/2024-07-10-digital-twin-earth.html)

1. Talking to Earth: a first-generation AI digital assistant - ESA Φ-lab, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://philab.esa.int/talking-to-earth-a-first-generation-ai-digital-assistant/](https://philab.esa.int/talking-to-earth-a-first-generation-ai-digital-assistant/)

1. Integrating Indigenous Knowledge Systems into Global Climate Adaptation Policies - ijerd, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.ijerd.com/paper/vol20-issue12/2012223231.pdf](https://www.ijerd.com/paper/vol20-issue12/2012223231.pdf)

1. (PDF) Integrating Indigenous Knowledge Systems into Global Climate Adaptation Policies, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387378525_Integrating_Indigenous_Knowledge_Systems_into_Global_Climate_Adaptation_Policies](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/387378525_Integrating_Indigenous_Knowledge_Systems_into_Global_Climate_Adaptation_Policies)

1. A Sample Proposal on "Integrating Indigenous Knowledge in Climate Adaptation Strategies" - fundsforNGOs - Grants and Resources for Sustainability, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.fundsforngos.org/all-proposals/a-sample-proposal-on-integrating-indigenous-knowledge-in-climate-adaptation-strategies/](https://www.fundsforngos.org/all-proposals/a-sample-proposal-on-integrating-indigenous-knowledge-in-climate-adaptation-strategies/)

1. Blending Indigenous Knowledge and artificial intelligence to enable adaptation - WWF Arctic, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.arcticwwf.org/the-circle/stories/blending-indigenous-knowledge-and-artificial-intelligence-to-enable-adaptation/](https://www.arcticwwf.org/the-circle/stories/blending-indigenous-knowledge-and-artificial-intelligence-to-enable-adaptation/)

1. Leave No Mountain Behind: The Synthesis Series - Integration of Indigenous knowledge for adaptation in mountain regions - weADAPT, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://weadapt.org/knowledge-base/adaptation-in-mountains/leave-no-mountain-behind-the-synthesis-series-integration-of-indigenous-knowledge-for-adaptation-in-mountain-regions/](https://weadapt.org/knowledge-base/adaptation-in-mountains/leave-no-mountain-behind-the-synthesis-series-integration-of-indigenous-knowledge-for-adaptation-in-mountain-regions/)

1. (PDF) Climate Communication Channels: An Innovative Approach Integrating AI/ML and Indigenous Knowledge Systems for Extreme Weather Events Prediction and Mitigation in Coastal Regions - ResearchGate, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.researchgate.net/publication/376030368_Climate_Communication_Channels_An_Innovative_Approach_Integrating_AIML_and_Indigenous_Knowledge_Systems_for_Extreme_Weather_Events_Prediction_and_Mitigation_in_Coastal_Regions](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/376030368_Climate_Communication_Channels_An_Innovative_Approach_Integrating_AIML_and_Indigenous_Knowledge_Systems_for_Extreme_Weather_Events_Prediction_and_Mitigation_in_Coastal_Regions)

1. AI for Climate Change: Using artificial and indigenous Intelligence to fight climate change, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://oxfordinsights.com/insights/ai-indigenous-intelligence/](https://oxfordinsights.com/insights/ai-indigenous-intelligence/)

1. Incorporating Indigenous Knowledge Systems into AI Governance: Enhancing Ethical Frameworks with Maori and Navajo Perspectives - Preprints.org, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202410.2112/v2](https://www.preprints.org/manuscript/202410.2112/v2)

1. The Integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) With Indigenous Knowledge Systems (IK) in Addressing the Impacts of Climate Change on Rural Farmers - IGI Global, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.igi-global.com/chapter/the-integration-of-artificial-intelligence-ai-with-indigenous-knowledge-systems-ik-in-addressing-the-impacts-of-climate-change-on-rural-farmers/366918](https://www.igi-global.com/chapter/the-integration-of-artificial-intelligence-ai-with-indigenous-knowledge-systems-ik-in-addressing-the-impacts-of-climate-change-on-rural-farmers/366918)

1. Harnessing Artificial Intelligence for Conservation: A Look at ManglarIA | Blog | Nature - PBS, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.pbs.org/wnet/nature/blog/artificial-intelligence-for-conservation-manglaria/](https://www.pbs.org/wnet/nature/blog/artificial-intelligence-for-conservation-manglaria/)

1. Environmental Sustainability Through AI: 8 Conservation Strategies - 2030.Builders, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://2030.builders/8-ways-ai-can-contribute-to-environmental-conservation/](https://2030.builders/8-ways-ai-can-contribute-to-environmental-conservation/)

1. AI predicts Earth's peak warming | Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://sustainability.stanford.edu/news/ai-predicts-earths-peak-warming](https://sustainability.stanford.edu/news/ai-predicts-earths-peak-warming)

1. Artificial Intelligence—A Game Changer for Climate Change and the Environment, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2018/06/05/artificial-intelligence-climate-environment/](https://news.climate.columbia.edu/2018/06/05/artificial-intelligence-climate-environment/)

1. Blackshark.ai | AI-based object detection and 3D digital twin of the entire planet., accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://blackshark.ai/](https://blackshark.ai/)

1. How AI can help combat climate change - JHU Hub, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://hub.jhu.edu/2023/03/07/artificial-intelligence-combat-climate-change/](https://hub.jhu.edu/2023/03/07/artificial-intelligence-combat-climate-change/)

1. Explained: Generative AI's environmental impact | MIT News, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://news.mit.edu/2025/explained-generative-ai-environmental-impact-0117](https://news.mit.edu/2025/explained-generative-ai-environmental-impact-0117)

1. How can AI support biodiversity without causing further environmental harm?, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://itcc.ieee.org/news/how-can-ai-support-biodiversity-without-causing-further-environmental-harm/](https://itcc.ieee.org/news/how-can-ai-support-biodiversity-without-causing-further-environmental-harm/)

1. Watch: AI Tools for Addressing Conservation and Biodiversity - California Council on Science & Technology (CCST), accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://ccst.us/register-ai-tools-for-addressing-conservation-and-biodiversity/](https://ccst.us/register-ai-tools-for-addressing-conservation-and-biodiversity/)

1. AI has an environmental problem. Here's what the world can do about that. - UNEP, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/ai-has-environmental-problem-heres-what-world-can-do-about](https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/ai-has-environmental-problem-heres-what-world-can-do-about)

1. unfccc.int, accessed on May 18, 2025, [https://unfccc.int/ttclear/misc\_/StaticFiles/gnwoerk_static/AI4climateaction/28da5d97d7824d16b7f68a225c0e3493/a4553e8f70f74be3bc37c929b73d9974.pdf](https://unfccc.int/ttclear/misc_/StaticFiles/gnwoerk_static/AI4climateaction/28da5d97d7824d16b7f68a225c0e3493/a4553e8f70f74be3bc37c929b73d9974.pdf)

\*\*
